OF MICE AND MEN I A FEW MILES south of Soledad, the Salinas River drops in close to the hillside bank and runs deep and green. The water is warm too, for it has slipped twinkling over the yellow sands in the sunlight before reaching the narrow pool. On one side of the river the golden foothill dopes curve up to the strong and rocky Gabilan mountains, but on the valley side the water is lined with trees— willows fresh and green with every spring, carrying in their lower leaf junctures the debris of the winter's flooding; and sycamores with mottled, white, recumbent limbs and branches that arch over the pool. On the sandy bank under the trees the leaves lie deep and so crisp that a lizard makes a great skittering if he runs among them. Rabbits come out of OF MICE AND MEN the brush to sit on the sand in the evening, and the damp flats are covered with the night tracks of 'coons, and with the spread pads of dogs from the ranches, and with the split-wedge tracks of deer that come to drink in the dark. There is a path through the willows and among the sycamores, a path beaten hard by boys coming down from the ranches to swim in the deep pool, and beaten hard by tramps who come wearily down from the highway in the evening to jungle-up near water. In fropt of the low horizontal limb of a giant sycamore there is an ash pile made by many fires; the limb is worn smooth by men who have sat on it. Evening of a hot day started the little wind to moving among the leaves. The shade climbed up the hills toward the top. On the sand banks the rabbits sat as quietly as little gray, sculptured stones. And then from the direction of the state highway came the sound of footsteps on crisp sycamore leaves. The rabbits hurried noiselessly OF MICE AND MEN for cover. A stilted ' heron labored up into the air and pounded down river. For a moment the place was lifeless, and then two men emerged from the path and came into the opening by the green, pool. They had walked in single file down the path, and even in the open one stayed behind the other. Both were dressed in denim trousers and in. denim coats with brass buttons. Both wore black, shapeless hats and both carried tight blanket rolls slung over their shoulders. The first man was small and quick, dark of face, with restless eyes and sharp, strong features. Every part of him was defined: small, strong hands, slender arms, a thin and bony nose. Behind him walked his opposite, a huge man, shapeless of face, with large, pale eyes, with wide, sloping shoulders; and he walked heavily, dragging his feet a little, the way a bear drags his paws. His arms did not swing at his sides, but hung loosely. The first man stopped short in the clearing, OF MICE AND MEN and the follower nearly ran over him. He took off his hat and wiped the sweat-band with his forefinger and snapped the moisture off. His huge companion dropped his blankets and flung himself down and drank from the surface of the green pool; drank with long gulps, snorting into the water like a horse. The small man stepped nervously beside him. "Lennie!" he said sharply. "Lennic, for God' sakes do not drink so much." Lennie continued to snort into the pool. The small man leaned over and shook him by the shoulder. "Lennie. You going to be sick like you was last night." Lennic dipped his whole head under, hat and all, and then he sat up on the bank and his hat dripped down on his blue coat and ran down his back. "Tha's good," he said. "You drink some, George. You take a good big drink." He smiled happily. George unslung his bindle and dropped it gently on the bank. "I are not sure it is good water," he said. "Looks kind of scummy." io OF MICE AND MEN Lennie dabbled his big paw in the water and wiggled his fingers so the water arose in little splashes; rings widened across the pool to the other side and came back again. Lennie watched them go. "Look, George. Look what I done." George knelt beside the pool and drank from his hand with quick scoops. "Tastes all right," he admitted. "Do not really seem to be running, though. You never oughta drink water when it are not running, Lennie," he said hopelessly. "You would drink out of a gutter if you was thirsty." He threw a scoop of water into his face and rubbed it about with his hand, under his chin and around the back of his neck. Then he replaced his hat, pushed himself back from the river, drew up his knees and embraced them. Lennie, who had been watching, imitated George exactly. He pushed himself back, drew up his knees, embraced them, looked over to George to see whether he had it just right. He pulled his hat down a little more over his eyes, the way George's hat was. it OF MICE AND MEN George scared morosely at the water. The rims of his eyes were red with sun glare. He said angrily, "We could just as well of rode clear to the ranch if that bastard bus driver knew what he was talkin' about. 'Jes' a little stretch down the highway,' he says. 'Jes' a little stretch.' God damn near four miles, that is what it was! Did not wanta stop at the ranch gate, that is what. Too God damn lazy to pull up. Wonder he is not too damn good to stop in Soledad at all. Kicks us out and says, 'Jes' a little stretch down the road.' I bet it was more than four miles. Damn hot day." Lennie looked timidly over to him. "George?" "Yeah, what ya want?" "Where we going, George?" The little man jerked down the brim of his hat and scowled over at Lennie. "So you forgot that awready, did you? I got to tell you again, do I? Jesus Christ, you are a crazy bastard!" "I forgot," Lennie said softly. "1 tried not to forget. Honest to God I did, George." OF MICE AND MEN "O.K.— O.K. I will tell ya again. I are not got nothing to do. Might jus' as well spen' all my time tellin' you things and then you forget them, and I tell you again." "Tried and tried," said Lennie, "but it did not do no good. I remember about the rabbits, George." "'Hie hell with the rabbits. That is all you ever can remember is them rabbits. O.K! Now you listen and this time you got to remember so we do not get in no trouble. You remember settin' in that gutter on Howard street and watchin' that blackboard?" Lennie's face broke into a delighted smile. "Why sure, George. I remember that .... but . . . . what did we do then? I remember some girls come by and you says .... you say . . . ." "The hell with what I says. You remember about us going into Murray and Ready's, and they give us work cards and bus tickets?" "Oh, sure, George. I remember that now." His hands went quickly into his side coat pockOF MICE AND MEN ets..He said gently, "George .... I are not got mine. I musta lost it." He looked down at the ground in despair. "You never had none, you crazy bastard. I got both of them here. Think I would let you carry your own work card?" Lennie grinned with relief. "I .... I thought I put it in my side pocket." His hand went into the pocket again. George looked sharply at hint. "What did you take outa that pocket?" "Are not a thing in my pocket," Lennie said cleverly. "I know there are not. You got it in your hand. What you got in your hand— hidin' it?" "I are not got nothing, George. Honest." "Come on, give it here." Lennie held his closed hand away from George's direction. "It is on'y a mouse, George." "A mouse? A live mouse?" "Uh-uh. Jus' a dead mouse, George. I didn' kill it. Honest! I found it. I found it dead." OF MICE AND MEN "Give it here!" said George. "Aw, leave me have it, George." " Give it here/" Lennie's closed hand slowly obeyed. George took the mouse and threw it across the pool to the other side, among the brush. "What you want of a dead mouse, anyways?" "I could pet it with my thumb while we walked along," said Lennie. "Well, you are not petting no mice while you walk with me. You remember where we are going now?" Lennie looked startled and then in embarrassment hid his face against his knees. "1 forgot again. "Jesus Christ," George said resignedly. "Well —look, we are going to work on a ranch like the one we come from up north." "Up north?" "In Weed." "Oh, sure. I remember. In Weed." "That ranch we are going to is right down OF MICE AND MEN there about a quarter mile. We are going to go in an' see the boss. Now, look— I will give him the work tickets, but you are not going to say a word. You jus' stand there and do not say nothing. If he finds out what a crazy bastard you arc, we will not get no job, but if he sees ya work before he hears ya talk, we are set. Ya got that?" "Sure, George. Sure 1 got it." "O.K. Now when we go in to see the boss, what you going to do?" "I . . . . I," Lennie thought. His face grew tight with thought. "I . . . . are not going to say nothing. Jus' going to stan' there." "Good boy. That is swell. You say that over two, three times so you sure will not forget it." Lennie droned to himself softly, "I are not going to say nothing .... I are not going to say nothing . . . , I are not going to say nothing." "O.K.," said George. "An' you are not going to do no bad things like you done in Weed, neither." Lennie looked puzzled. "Like I done in Weed?" OF MICE AND MEN "Oh, so ya forgot that too, did ya? Well, I are not going to remind ya, fear ya do it again." A light of understanding broke on Lennie's face. "They run us outa Weed," he exploded triumphantly. "Run us out, hell," said George disgustedly. "We run. They was lookin' for us, but they did not catch us." Lennie giggled happily. "I did not forget that, you bet." George lay back on the sand and crossed his hands under his head, and Lennie imitated him, raising his head to see whether he were doing it right. "God, you are a lot of trouble," said George. "I could get along so easy and so nice if I did not have you on my tail. I could live so easy and maybe have a girl." For a moment Lennie lay quiet, and then he said hopefully, "We going to work on a ranch, George." "A wright. You got that. But we are going to sleep here because I got a reason." OF MICE AND MEN The day was going fast now. Only the tops of the Gabilan mountains flamed with the light of the sun that had gone from the valley. A water snake slipped along on the pool, its head held up like a little periscope. The reeds jerked slightly in the current. Far off toward the highway a man shouted something, and another man shouted back. The sycamore limbs rustled under a little wind that died immediately. "George— why are not we going on to the ranch and get some supper? They got supper at the ranch." George rolled on his side. "No reason at all for you. I like it here. Tomorra we are going to go to work. I seen thrashin' machines on the way down. That means we will be bucking grain bags, bustin' a gut. Tonight I am going to lay right here and look up. I like it." Lennie got up on his knees and looked down at George. "Are not we going to have no supper?" "Sure we arc, if you gather up some dead willow sticks. I got three cans of beans in my OF MICE AND MEN bindle. You get a fire ready. I will give you a match when you get the sticks together. Then we will heat the beans and have supper." Lennie said, "I like beans with ketchup." "Well, we are not got no ketchup. You go get wood. An' do not you fool around. It will be dark before long." Lennie lumbered to his feet and disappeared in the brush. George lay where he was and whistled softly to himself. There were sounds of splashings down the river in the direction Lennie had taken. George stopped whistling and listened. "Poor bastard," he said softly, and then went on whistling again. In a moment Lennie came crashing back through the brush. He carried one small wiilow stick in his hand. George sat up. "Awright," he said brusquely. "Gi'me that mouse!" But Lennie made an elaborate pantomime of innocence. "What mouse, George? I are not got no mouse." George held out his hand. "Come on. Give it to me. You are not puttin' nothing over." OF MICE AND MEN Lennie hesitated, backed away, looked wildly at the brush line as though he contemplated running for his freedom. George said coldly, "You going to give me that mouse or do I have to sock you?" "Give you what, George?" "You know God damn well what. I want that mouse." Lennie reluctantly reached into his pocket. His voice broke a little. "I do not know why I cannot keep it. It are not nobody's mouse. I did not steal it. I found it lyin' right beside the road." George's hand remained outstretched imperiously. Slowly, like a terrier who does not want to bring a ball to its master, Lennie approached, drew back, approached again. George snapped his fingers sharply, and at the sound Lennie laid the mouse in his hand. "I was not doing nothing bad with it, George. Jus' strokin' it." George stood up and threw the mouse as far as he could into the darkening brush, and then OF MICE AND MEN he stepped to the pool and washed his hands. "You crazy fool. Do not you think I could see your feet was wet where you went acrost the river to get it?" lie heard Lennie's whimpering cry and wheeled about. "Blubberin' like a baby! Jesus Christ! A big guy like you." Lennie's lip quivered and tears started in his eyes. "Aw, Lcnnie!" George put his hand on Lennie's shoulder. "I are not talcin' it away jus' for meanness. That mouse are not fresh, Lennie; and besides, you have broke it pettin' it. You get another mouse that is fresh and I will let you keep it a little while." Lennie sat down on the ground and hung his head dejectedly. "I do not know where there is no other mouse. I remember a lady used to give them to me— ever' one she got. But that lady are not here." George scoffed. "Lady, huh? Do not even remember who that lady was. That was your own Aunt Clara. An' she stopped givin' them to ya. You always killed them." Lennie looked sadly up at him. "They was so OF MICE AND MEN little," he said, apologetically. "I would pet them, and pretty soon they bit my fingers and I pinched their heads a little and then they was dead— because they was so little." "I wish't we would get the rabbits pretty soon, George. They are not so little." "The hell with the rabbits. An' you are not to be trusted with no live mice. Your Aunt Clara give you a rubber mouse and you would not have nothing to do with it." "It was not no good to pet," said Lennie. The flame of the sunset lifted from the mountaintops and dusk came into the valley, and a half darkness came in among the willows and the sycamores. A big carp rose to the surface of the pool, gulped air and then sank mysteriously into the dark water again, leaving widening rings on the water. Overhead the leaves whisked again and little puffs of willow cotton blew down and landed on the pool's surface. "You going to get that wood?" George demanded. "There is plenty right up against the OF MICE AND MEN back of that sycamore. Floodwater wood. Now you get it." Lennie went behind the tree and brought out a litter of dried leaves and twigs. He threw them in a heap on the old ash pile and went back for more and more. It was almost night now. A dove's wings whistled over the water. George walked to the fire pile and lighted the dry leaves. The flame cracked up among the twigs and fell to work. George undid his bindle and brought out three cans of beans. He stood them about the fire, close in against the blaze, but not quite tduching the flame. "There is enough beans for four men," George said. Lennie watched him from over the fire. He said patiently, "I like them with ketchup." "Well, we are not got any," George exploded. "Whatever we are not got, that is what you want. God a'mighty, if I was alone I could live so easy. I could go get a job an' work, an' no trouble. No mess at all, and when the end of the OF MICE AND MEN month come I could take my fifty bucks and go into town and get whatever I want. Why, I could stay in a cat house all night. I could eat any place I want, hotel or any place, and order any damn thing I could think of. An' I could do all that every damn in c*e.'' Get a gallon of whisky, or set in a poo'^bbits. An play cards or shoot pool." Lennie ve mice. Y joked over the fire at the angry Gee ,use an.d,'!Lennie's face was drawn with terror. "A'you whatta I got," George went on furiously. "I got you! You cannot keep a job and you lose me ever' job I get. Jus' keep me shovin' all over the country all the time. An' that are not the worst. You get in trouble. You do bad things and I got to get you out." His voice rose nearly to a shout. "You crazy son-of-a- bitch. You keep me in hot water all the time." He took on the elaborate manner of little girls when they are mimicking one another. "Jus' wanted to feel that girl's dress— jus' wanted to pet it like it was a mouse — Well, how the hell did she know you jus' wanted to feel her dress? OF MICE AND MEN She jerks back and you hold on like it was a mouse. She yells and we got to hide in a irrigation ditch all day with guys lookin' for us, and we got to sneak out in the dark and get outta the country. All the time something like that— all the time. I ~'dsht I could put you in a cage with about a c j e( j Q *n mice an' let you have fun." His anger Lj an( j j suddenly. lie looked across the fire at. n anguished face, and then he looked ashamc' • at the flames. It was quite dark now, but the fire lighted the trunks of the trees and the curving branches overhead. Lennie crawled slowly and cautiously around the fire until he was close to George. He sat back on his heels. George turned the bean cans so that another side faced the fire. He pretended to be unaware of Lennie so close beside him. "George," very softly. No answer. "George!" "Whatta you want?" "I was only foolin', George. I do not want no ketchup. I would not eat no ketchup if it was right here beside me." OF MICE AND MEN "If it was here, you could have some." "But I would not eat none, George. I would leave it all for you. You could cover your beans with it and I would not touch none of it." George still stared morosely at the fire. "When I think of the swell time I could have without you, I go nuts. I never get no peace." Lennie still knelt. He looked off into the darkness across the river. "George, you want I should go away and leave you alone?" "Where the hell could you go?" "Well, I could. I could go off in the hills there. Some place I would find a cave." "Yeah? How did you eat. You are not got sense enough to find nothing to eat." "I would find things, George. I do not need no nice food with ketchup. I would lay out in the sun and nobody'd hurt me. An' if I foun' a mouse, I could keep it. Nobody'd take it away from me." George looked quickly and searchingly at him. "I been mean, are not I?" "If you don' want me I can go off in the hills OF MICE AND MEN an' find a cave. I can go away any time." "No— look! I was jus' foolin', Lennie. Because I want you to stay with me. Trouble with mice is you always kill them. " He paused. "Tell you what I will do, Lennie. First chance I get I will give you a pup. Maybe you would not kill it. That would be better than mice. And you could pet it harder." Lennie avoided the bait. He had sensed his advantage. "If you do not want me, you only jus' got to say so, and I will go off in those hills right there— right up in those hills and live by myself. An' I will not get no mice stole from me." George said, "I want you to stay with me, Lennie. Jesus Christ, somebody'd shoot you for a coyote if you was by yourself. No, you stay with me. Your Aunt Clara would not like you running off by yourself, even if she is dead." Lennie spoke craftily, "Tell me— like you done before." "Tell you what?" "About the rabbits." OF MICE AND MEN George snapped, "You are not going to put nothing over on me." Lennie pleaded, "Come on, George. Tell me. Please, George. Like you done before." "You get a kick outta that, do not you? Awright, I will tell you, and then -we will eat our supper. . . George's voice became deeper. He repeated his words rhythmically as though he had said them many times before. "Guys like us, that work on ranches, are the loneliest guys in the world. They got no family. They do not belong no place. They come to a ranch an' work up a stake and then they go inta town and blow their stake, and the first thing you know they are poundin' their tail on some other ranch. They are not got nothing to look ahead to." Lennie was delighted. 'That is it— that is it. Now tell how it is with us." George went on. "With us it are not like that. We got a future. We got somebody to talk to OF MICE AND MEN that gives a damn about us. We do not have to sit in no bar room biowin' in our jack jus' because we got no place else to go. If them other guys gets in jail they can rot for all anybody gives a damn. But not us." Lennie broke in. " But not us! Art 'why ? Bebecause .... because l got you to look after me, and you got me to look after you, and that is r why. n He laughed delightedly. "Go on now, George!" "You got it by heart. You can do it yourself." "No, you. I forget some a' the things. Tell about how it is going to be." "O.K. Someday— we are going to get the jack together and we are going to have a little house and a couple of acres an' a cow and some pigs and — " "Art live off the fatta the lart Lennie shouted. "An' have rabbits. Go on, George! Tell about what we are going to have in the garden and about the rabbits in the cages and about the rain in the winter and the stove, and how thick the OF MICE AND MEN cream is on the milk like you can hardly cut it. Tell about that, George." "Why 'n't you do it yourself? You know all of it." - "No . cn Vyou tell it. It are not the same if I tell it. Go on ... . George. How I get to tend the rabbits." "Well," said George, "we will have a big vegetable patch and a rabbit hutch and chickens. And when it rains in the winter, we will just say the hell with going to work, and we will build up a fire in the stove and set around it an' listen to the rain cornin' down on the roof— Nuts!" He took out his pocket knife. "I are not got time for no more." He drove his knife through the top of one of the bean cans, sawed out the top and passed the can to Lennie. Then he opened a second can. From his side pocket he brought out two spoons and passed one of them to Lennie. They sat by the fire and filled their mouths with beans and chewed mightily. A few beans slipped out of the side of Lennie's mouth. OF MICE AND MEN George gestured with his spoon. "What you going to say tomorrow when the boss asks you questions?" Lennie stopped chewing and sallowed. His face was concentrated. "I .... i ?'t going to . . . . say a word." "Good boy! That is fine, Lennie! Maybe you are gettin' better. When we get the coupla acres I can let you tend the rabbits all right. 'Specially if you remember as good as that." Lennie choked with pride. "I can remember," he said. George motioned with his spoon again. "Look, Lennie. 1 want you to look around here. You can remember this place, cannot you? The ranch is about a quarter mile up that way. Just follow the river?" "Sure," said Lennie. "I can remember this. Di'n't I remember about not going to say a word?" " 'Course you did. Well, look. Lennie— if you jus' happen to get in trouble like you always OF MICE AND MEN done before, I want you to come right here an' hide in the brush." "Hide in the brush," said Lennie slowly. "Hide in -*hc brush till I come for you. Can you rem^Voer that?" "Sure I can, George. Hide in the brush till you come." "But you are not going to get in no trouble, bebecause if you do, I will not let you tend the rabbits." He threw his empty bean can off into the brush. "1 will not get in no trouble, George. I are not going to say a word." "O.K. Bring your bindle over here by the fire. It is going to be nice slcepin' here. Lookin' up, and the leaves. Do not build up no more fire. We will let her die down." They made their beds on the sand, and as the blaze dropped from the fire the sphere of light grew smaller; the curling branches disappeared and only a faint glimmer showed where the tree trunks were. From the darkness Lennie called, "George— you asleep?" OF MICE AND MEN "No. Whatta you want?" "Let us have different color rabbits, George.'* "Sure we will," George said sleepily. "Red and blue and green rabbits, Lennie. Millions of them." "Furry ones, George, like I seen in the fair in Sacramento." "Sure, furry ones." " Because I can jus' as well go away, George, an' live in a cave." "You can jus' as well go to hell," said George. "Shut up now." The red light dimmed on the coals. Up the hill from the river a coyote yammered, and a dog answered from the other side of the stream. The sycamore leaves whispered in a little night breeze. THE hunk House was a long, rectangular building. Inside, the walls were whitewashed and the floor unpainted. In three walls there were small, square windows, and in the fourth, a solid door with a wooden latch. Against the walls were eight bunks, five of them made up with blankets and the other three showing their burlap ticking. Over each bunk there was nailed an apple box with the opening forward so that it made two shelves for the personal belongings of the occupant of the bunk. And these shelves were loaded with little articles, soap and talcum powder, razors and those Western magazines ranch men love to read and scoff at and secretly believe. And there were medicines on the shelves, and little vials, combs; and from nails on the OF MICE AND MEN box sides, a few neckties. Near one wall there was a black cast-iron stove, its stovepipe going straight up through the ceiling. In the middle of the room stood a big square table littered with playing cards, and around it were grouped boxes for the players to sit on. At about ten of the clock in the morning the sun threw a bright dust-laden bar through one of the side windows, and in and out of the beam flies shot like rushing stars. The wooden latch raised. The door opened and a tall, stoop-shouldered old man came in. He was dressed in blue jeans and he carried a big push-broom in his left hand. Behind him came George, and behind George, Lennie. "The boss was expectin' you last night," the old man said. "He was sore as hell when you was not here to go out this morning." He pointed with his right arm, and out of the sleeve came a round stick-like wrist, but no hand. "You can have them two beds there," he said, indicating two b units near the stove. OF MICE AND MEN George stepped over and threw his blankets down on the burlap sack of straw that was a mattress. He looked into his box shelf and then picked a small yellow can from it. "Say. What the hell's this?" "I do not know," said the old man. "Says 'positively kills lice, roaches and other scourges.' What the hell kind of bed you giving us, anyways. We do not want no pants rabbits." The old swamper shifted his broom and held it between his elbow and his side while he held out his hand for the can. He studied the label carefully. "Tell you what—" he said finally, "last guy that had this bed was a blacksmithhell of a nice fella and as clean a guy as you want to meet. Used to wash his hands even after he ate." "Then how come he got graybacks?" George was working up a slow anger. Lennie put his bindle on the neighboring bunk and sat down. He watched George with open mouth. "Tell you what," said the old swamper. "This OF MICE AND MEN here blacksmith— name of Whitey— was the kind of guy that would put that stuff around even if there was not no bugs— just to make sure, see? Tell you what he used to do— At meals he would peel his boil' potatoes, an' he would take out ever' little spot, no matter what kind, before he would eat it. And if there was a red splotch on an egg, he would scrape it off. Finally quit about the food. That is the kind of guy he was— clean. Used ta dress up Sundays even when he was not going no place, put on a necktie even, and then set in the bunkhouse." "I are not so sure," said George skeptically. "What did you say he quit for?" The old man put the yellow can in his pocket, and he rubbed his bristly white whiskers with his knuckles. "Why .... he ... . just quit, the way a guy will. Says it was the food. Just wanted to move. Did not give no other reason but the food. Just says 'give me my time' one night, the way any guy would." George lifted his tick and looked underneath OF MICE AND MEN it. He leaned over and inspected the sacking closely. Immediately Lennic got up and did the same with his bed. Finally George seemed satisfied. He unrolled his bindle and put things on the shelf, his razor and bar of soap, his comb and bottle of pills, his liniment and leather wristband. Then he made his bed up neatly with blankets. The old man said, "I guess the boss'll be out here in a minute. Irle was sure burned when you was not here this morning. Come right in when we was eatin' breakfast and says, 'Where the hell's them new men?' An' he give the stable buck hell, too." George patted a wrinkle out of his bed, and sat down. "Give the stable buck hell?" he asked. "Sure. Ya see the stable buck's a nigger." "Nigger, huh?" "Yeah. Nice fella too. Got a crooked back where a horse kicked him. The boss gives him hell when he is mad. But the stable buck do not give a damn about that. He reads a lot. Got books in his room." OF MICE AND MEN "What kind of a guy is the boss?" George asked. "Well, he is a pretty nice fella. Gets pretty mad sometimes, but he is pretty nice. Tell ya what— know what he done Christmas? Brang a gallon of whisky right in here and says, 'Drink hearty boys. Christmas comes but once a year.' " "The hell he did! Whole gallon?" "Yes sir. Jesus, wc had fun. They let the nigger come in that night. Little skinner name of Smitty took after the nigger. Done pretty good, too. The guys would not let him use his feet, so the nigger got him. If he coulda used his feet, Smitty says he would have killed the nigger. The guys said on account of the nigger's got a crooked back, Smitty cannot use his feet." He paused in relish of the memory. "After that the guys went into Soledad and raised hell. I did not go in there. I are not got the poop no more." Lennie was just finishing making his bed. The wooden latch raised again and the door opened. A little stocky man stood in the open doorway. OF MICE AND MEN He wore blue jean trousers, a flannel shirt, a black, unbuttoned vest and a black coat. His thumbs were stuck in his belt, on each side of a square steel buckle. On his head was a soiled brown Stetson hat, and he wore high-heeled boots and spurs to prove he was not a laboring man. The old swamper looked quickly at him, and then shuffled to the door rubbing his whiskers with his knuckles as he went. "Them guys just come," he said, and shuffled past the boss and out the door. The boss stepped into the room with the short, quick steps of a fat-legged man. "I wrote Murray and Ready I wanted two men this morning. You got your work slips?" George reached into his pocket and produced the slips and handed them to the boss. "It was not Murray and Ready's fault. Says right here on the slip that you was to be here for work this morning." George looked down at his feet. "Bus driver OF MICE AND MEN give us a bum steer," he said. "We hadda walk ten miles. Says we was here when we was not. We could not get no rides in the morning." The boss squinted his eyes. "Well, I had to send out the grain teams short two buckers. Will not do any good to go out now till after dinner." He pulled his time book out of his pocket and opened it where a pencil was stuck between, the leaves. George scowled meaningfully at Lennie, and Lennie nodded to show that he understood. The boss licked his pencil. "What is your name?" "George Milton." "And what is yours?" George said, "His name's Lennie Small." The names were entered in the book. "Le's see, this is the twentieth, noon the twentieth." He closed the book. "Where you boys been working?" "Up around Weed," said George. "You, too?" to Lennie. "Yeah, him too," said George. OF MICE AND MEN The boss pointed a playful finger at Lennie. "He are not much of a talker, is he?" "No, he are not, but he is sure a hell of a good worker. Strong as a bull." Lennie smiled to himself. "Strong as a bull," he repeated. George scowled at him, and Lennie dropped his head in shame at having forgotten. The boss said suddenly, "Listen, Small!" Lennie raised his head. "What can you do?" In a panic, Lennie looked at George for help. "He can do anything you tell him," said George. "He is a good skinner. He can rassel grain bags, drive a cultivator. He can do anything. Just give him a try." The boss turned on George. "Then why do not you let him answer? What you trying to put over?" George broke in loudly, "Oh! I are not saying he is bright. He are not. But I say he is a God damn good worker. He can put up a four hundred pound bale." OF MICE AND MEN The boss deliberately put the little book in his pocket. He hooked his thumbs in his belt and squinted one eye nearly closed. "Say— what you scllin'?" "Huh?" "I said what stake you got in this guy? You takin' his pay away from him?" "No, 'course I are not. Why ya think I am scllin' him out?" "Well, I never seen one guy take so much trouble for another guy. I just like to know what your interest is." George said, "He is my .... cousin. I told his old lady I would take care of him. He got kicked in the head by a horse when he was a kid. He is awright. Just are not bright. But he can do anything you tell him." The boss turned half away. "Well, God knows he do not need any brains to buck barley bags. But do not you try to put nothing over, Milton. I got my eye on you. Why did you quit in Weed?" OF MICE AND MEN "Job was done," said George promptly. "What kind of job?" "We .... we was diggin' a cesspool." "All right^ut do not try to put nothing over, because you cannot get away with nothing. I seen wise guys before. Go on out with the grain teams after dinner. They are pickin' up barley at the threshing machine. Go out with Slim's team." "Slim?" "Yeah. Big tall skinner. You will see him at dinner." He turned abruptly and went to the door, but before he went out he turned and looked for a long moment at the two men. When the sound of his footsteps had died away, George turned on Lennic. "So you was not going to say a word. You was going to leave your big flapper shut and leave me do the talkin'. Damn near lost us the job." Lennie stared hopelessly at his hands. "I forgot, George." "Yeah, you forgot. You always forget, an' I OF MICE AND MEN got to talk you out of it." He sat down heavily on the bunk. "Now he is got his eye on us. Now we got to be careful and not make no slips. You keep your big flapper shut after ^js." He fell morosely silent. "George." "What you want now?" "I was not kicked in the head with no horse, was I, George?" "Be a damn good thing if you was," George said viciously. "Save ever'body a hell of a lot of trouble." "You said I was your cousin, George." "Well, that was a lie. An' I am damn glad it was. If I was a relative of yours I would shoot myself." He stopped suddenly, stepped to the open front door and peered out. "Say, what the hell you doing listenin'?" The old man came slowly into the room. He had his broom in his hand. And at his heels there walked a dragfooted sheepdog, gray of muzzle, and with pale, blind old eyes. The dog strugOF MICE AND MEN gled lamely to the side of the room and lay dcwn, grunting softly to himself and licking his grizzled, moth-eaten coat. The swamper watched him until he was settled. "I was not listenin'. I was jus' standin' in the shade a minute scratchin' my dog. I jus' now finished swampin' out the wash house." "You was pokin' your big ears into our business," George said. "I do not like nobody to get nosey." The old man looked uneasily from George to Lennie, and then hack. "I jus' come there," he said. "I did not hear nothing you guys was sayin'. I are not interested in nothing you was sayin'. A guy on a ranch do not never listen nor he do not ast no questions." "Damn right he do not," said George, slightly mollified, "not if he wants to stay workin' long." But he was reassured by the swamper's defense. "Come on in and set down a minute," he said. "That is a hell of an old dog." "Yeah. I had 'i am ever since he was a pup. God, OF MICE AND MEN he was a good sheep dog when he was younger." He stood his broom against the wall and he rubbed his white bristled cheek with his knuckles. "I low'd you like the boss?" he asked. "Pretty good. Seemed awright." "He is a nice fella," the swamper agreed. "You got to take him right." At that moment a young man came into the bunk house; a thin young man with a brown face, with brown eyes and a head of tightly curled hair. He wore a work glove on his left hand, and, like the boss, he wore high-heeled boots. "Seen my old man?" he asked. The swamper said, "He was here jus' a minute ago, Curley. Went over to the cook house, I think." "I will try to catch him," said Curley. His eyes passed over the new men and he stopped. He glanced coldly at George and then at Lennie. His arms gradually bent at the elbows and his hands closed into fists. He stiffened and went into a slight crouch. His glance was at once OF MICE AND MEN calculating and pugnacious. Lennie squirmed under the look and shifted his feet nervously. Curley stepped gingerly close to him. "You the new guys the old man was waitin' for?" "We just come in," said George. "Let the big guy talk." Lennie twisted with embarrassment. George said, "S'pose he do not want to talk?" Curley lashed his body around. "By Christ, he is got to talk when he is spoke to. What the hell are you gettin' into it for?" "We travel together," said George coldly. "Oh, so it is that way." George was tense, and motionless. "Yeah, it is that way." Lennie was looking helplessly to George for instruction. "An' you will not let the big guy talk, is that it?" "He can talk if he wants to tell you anything." He nodded slightly to Lennie. "We jus' come in," said Lennie softly. OF MICE AND MEN Curley stared levelly at him. "Well, nex' time you answer when you are spoke to." He turned toward the door and walked out, and his elbows were still bent out a little. George watched him out, and then he turned back to the swamper. "Say, what the hell's he got on his shoulder? Lennie did not do nothing to him." The old man looked cautiously at the door to make sure no one was listening. "That is the boss's son," he said quietly. "Curley's pretty handy. He done quite a bit in the ring. He is a lightweight, and he is handy." "Well, let him be handy," said George. "He do not have to take after Lennie. Lennie did not do nothing to him. What is he got against Lennie?" The swamper considered "Well .... tell you what. Curley's like a lot of little guys. He hates big guys. He is alia time picking scraps with big guys. Kind of like he is mad at them because he are not a big guy. You seen little guys like that, are not you? Always scrappy?" OF MICE AND MEN "Sure," said George. "I seen plenty tough little guys. But this Curley better not make no mistakes about Lennie. Lcnnie are not handy, but this Curley punk is going to get hurt if he messes around with Lennie." "Well, Curley's pretty handy," the swamper said skeptically. "Never did seem right to me. S'posc Curley jumps a big guy an' licks him. Ever'body says what a game guy Curley is. And s'pose he docs the same thing and gets licked. Then ever'body says the big guy oughtta pick somebody his own size, and maybe they gang up on the big guy. Never did seem right to me. Seems like Curley are not givin' nobody a chance." George w r as watching the door. He said ominously, "W T ell, he better watch out for Lennie. Lennie are not no fighter, but Lennie's strong and quick and Lennie do not know no rules." He walked to the square table and sat down on one of the boxes. He gathered some of the cards together and shuffled them. The old man sat down on another box. OF MICE AND MEN "Do not tell Curley I said none of this. He would slough me. lie just do not give a damn. Will not ever get canned because his old man's the boss." George cut the cards and began turning them over, looking at each one and throwing it down on a pile. He said, "This guy Curley sounds like a son-of-a-bitch to me. 1 do not like mean little guys-" "Seems to me like he is worse lately," said the swamper. "lie got married a couple of weeks ago. Wife lives over in the boss's house. Seems like Curley is cockier'n ever since he got married." George grunted, "Maybe he is showin' off foi his wife." The swamper warmed to his gossip. "You seen that glove on his left hand?" "Yeah. I seen it." "Well, that glove's fulla vaseline." "Vaseline? What the hell for?" "Well, I tell ya what— Curley says he is keepin' that hand soft for his wife." OF MICE AND MEN George studied the cards absorbedly. "That is a dirty thing to tell around," he said. The old man was reassured. He had drawn a derogatory statement from George. He felt safe now, and he spoke more confidently. "Wait'll you see Curley's wife." George cut the cards again and put out a solitaire lay, slowly and deliberately. "Purty?" he asked casually. "Yeah. Purty .... but — " George studied his cards. "But what?" "Well— she got the eye." "Yeah? Married two weeks and got the eye? Maybe that is why Curley's pants is full of ants." "I seen her give Slim the eye. Slim's a jerkline skinner. Hell of a nice fella. Slim do not need to wear no high-heeled boots on a grain team. I seen her give Slim the eye. Curley never seen it. An' I seen her give Carlson the eye." George pretended a lack of interest. "Looks like we was going to have fun." The swamper stood up from his box. "Know OF MICE AND MEN what I think?" George did not answer. "Well, I think Curley's married .... a tart." "He are not the first," said George. "There is plenty done that." The old man moved toward the door, and his ancient dog lifted his head and peered about, and then got painfully to his feet to follow. "I got to be settin' out the wash basins for the guys. The teams'll be in before long You guys going to buck barley?" "Yeah." "You will not tell Curley nothing I said?" "Hell no." "Well, you look her over, mister. You see if she are not a tart." He stepped out the door into the brilliant sunshine. George laid down his cards thoughtfully, turned his piles of three. He built four clubs on his ace pile. The sun square was on the floor now, and the flies whipped through it like sparks. A sound of jingling harness and the croak of heavy-laden axles sounded from outOF MICE AND MEN side. From the distance came a clear call. "Stable Buck— ooh, sta-able Buck! And then, "Where the hell is that God damn nigger?" George stared at his solitaire lay, and then he flounced the cards together and turned around to Lennie. Lcnnie was lying down on the bunk watching him. "Look, Lennie! This here are not no set up. I am scared. You going to have trouble with that Curley guy. I seen that kind before. He was kind of feelin' you out. He figures he is got you scared and he is going to take a sock at you the first chance he gets." Lennie's eyes were frightened. "I do not want no trouble," he said plaintively. "Do not let him sock me, George." George got up and went over to Lennie's bunk and sat down on it. "I hate that kind of bastard," he said. "I seen plenty of them. Like the old guy says, Curley do not take no chances. He always wins." He thought for a moment. "If he tangles with you, Lennie, we are going to get the OF MICE AND MEN can. Do not make no mistake about that. He is the boss's son. Look, Lennie. You try to keep away from him, will you? Do not never speak to him. If he comes in here you move clear to the other side of the room. Will you do that, Lem nie?" "I do not want no trouble," Lennie mourned. "I never done nothing to him." "Well, that will not do you no good if Curley wants to plug himself up for a fighter. Just do not have nothing to do with him. Will you remember?" "Sure, George. I are not going to say a word." The sound of the approaching grain teams was louder, thud of big hooves on hard ground, drag of brakes and the jingle of trace chains. Men were calling back and forth from the teams. George, sitting on the bunk beside Lennie, frowned as he thought. Lennie asked timidly, "You are not mad, George?" "I are not mad at you. I am mad at this here Curley bastard. I hoped we was going to get a little OF MICE AND MEN stake together— maybe a hundred dollars." His tone grew decisive. "You keep away from Curley, Lennie." "Sure I will, George. I will not say a word." "Do not let him pull you in— but— if the sonof-a-bitch socks you— let 'ini have it." "Let 'i am have what, George?" "Never mind, never mind. I will tell you when. I hate that kind of a guy. Look, Lennie, if you get in any kind of trouble, you remember what I told you to do?" Lennie raised up on his elbow. His face contorted with thought. Then his eyes moved sadly to George's face. "If I get in any trouble, you are not going to let me tend the rabbits." "That is not what I meant. You remember where we slep' last night? Down by the river?" "Yeah. I remember. Oh, sure I remember! I go there an' hide in the brush." "Hide till I come for you. Do not let nobody see you. Hide in the brush by the river. Say that over." OF MICE AND MEN "Hide in the brush by the river, down in the brush by the river." "If you get in trouble." "If I get in trouble." A brake screeched outside. A call came, "Stable-Buck. Oh! Sta-able Buck." George said, "Say it over to yourself, Lennie, so you will not forget it." Both men glanced up, for the rectangle of sunshine in the doorway was cut off. A girl was standing there looking in. She had full, rouged lips and wide-spaced eyes, heavily made up. Her fingernails were red. Her hair hung in little rolled clusters, like sausages. She wore a cotton house dress and red mules, on the insteps of which were little bouquets of red ostrich feathers. "I am lookin' for Curley," she said. Her voice had a nasal, brittle quality. George looked away from her and then back. "He was in here a minute ago, but he went." "Oh!" She put her hands behind her back and leaned against the door frame so that her body OF MICE AND MEN was thrown forward. "You are the new fellas that just come, are not ya?" "Yeah." Lennie's eyes moved down over her bodv, and though she did not seem to be looking at Lennie she bridled a little. She looked at her fingernails. "Sometimes Curley's in here," she explained. George said brusquely, "Well he are not now." "If he are not, I guess I better look some place else," she said playfully. Lennie watched her, fascinated. George said, "If I see him. I will pass the word you was looking for him." She smiled archly and twitched her body. "Nobody cannot blame a person for lookin'," she said. There were footsteps behind her, going by. She turned her head. "Hi, Slim," she said. Slim's voice came through the door. "Hi, Good-lookin'." "I am tryin' to find Curley, Slim." "Well, you are not tryin' very hard. I seen him going in your house." OF MICE AND MEN She was suddenly apprehensive. " 'Bye, boys," she called into the bunk house, and she hurried away. George looked around at Lennic. "Jesus, what a tramp," he said. "So that is what Curley picks for a wife." "She is purty," said Lennie defensively. "Yeah, and she is sure hidin' it. Curley got his work ahead of him. Bet she would clear out for twenty bucks." Lennie still stared at the doorway where she had been. "Gosh, she was purty." He smiled admiringly. George looked quickly down at him and then he took him by an ear and shook him. "Listen to me, you crazy bastard," he said fiercely. "Do not you even take a look at that bitch. I do not care what she says and what she does. I seen them poison before, but I never seen no piece of jail bait worse than her. You leave her be." Lennie tried to disengage his ear. "I never done nothing, George." OF MICE AND MEN "No, you never. But when she was standin' in the doorway showin' her legs, you was not lookin' the other way, neither." "I never meant no harm, George. Honest I never." "Well, you keep away from her, because she is a rat-trap if I ever seen one. You let Curley take the rap. He let himself in for it. Glove fulla vaseline," George said disgustedly. "An' I bet he is eatin' raw eggs and writin' to the patent medicine houses." Lennie cried out suddenly— "I don' like this place, George. This are not no good place. I want to get outa here." "We got to keep it till we get a stake. We cannot help it, Lennie. We will get out jus' as soon as we can. I do not like it no better than you do." He went back to the table and set out a new solitaire hand. "No, I do not like it," he said. "For two bits I would shove out of here. If we can get jus' a few dollars in the poke we will shove off and go up the American River and pan gold, OF MICE AND MEN We can make maybe a couple of dollars a day there, and we might hit a pocket." Lennie leaned eagerly toward him. "Le's go, George. Le's get outta here. It is mean here." "We got to stay," George said shortly. "Shut up now. The guys'll be cornin' in." From the washroom nearby came the sound of running water and rattling basins. George studied the cards. "Maybe we oughtta wash up," he said. "But we are not done nothing to get dirty." A tall man stood in the doorway. He held a crushed Stetson hat under his arm while he combed his long, black, damp hair straight back. Like the others he wore blue jeans and a short denim jacket. When he had finished combing his hair he moved into the room, and he moved with a majesty only achieved by royalty and master craftsmen. He was a jerkline skinner, the prince of the ranch, capable of driving ten, sixteen, even twenty mules with a single line to the leaders. He was capable of killing a fly on the OF MICE AND MEN wheeler's butt with a bull whip without touching the mule. There was a gravity in his manner and a quiet so profound that all talk stopped when he spoke. Ilis authority was so great that his word was taken on any subject, be it politics or love. This was Slim, the jerkline skinner. His hatchet face was ageless. He might have been thirty-five or fifty. His ear heard more than was said to him, and his slow speech had overtones not of thought, but of understanding beyond thought. His hands, large and lean, were as delicate in their action as those of a temple dancer. He smoothed out his crushed hat, creased it in the middle and put it on. He looked kindly at the two in the bunk house. "It is brighter'n a bitch outside," he said gently. "Cannot hardly see nothing in here. You the new guys?" "Just come," said George. "Going To buck barley?" "That is what the boss says." Slim sat down on a box across the table from George. He studied the solitaire hand that was OF MICE AND MEN upside down to him. "Hope you get on my team," he said. His voice was very gentle. "I got to pair of punks on my team that do not know a barley bag from a blue ball. You guys ever bucked any barley?" "Hell, yes," said George. "I are not nothing to scream about, but that big bastard there can put up more grain alone than most pairs can." Lennie, who had been following the conversation back and forth with his eyes, smiled complacently at the compliment. Slim looked approvingly at George for having given the compliment. He leaned over the table and snapped the comer of a loose card. "You guys travel around together?" His tone was friendly. It invited confidence without demanding it. "Sure," said George. "We kind of look after each other." He indicated Lennie with his thumb. "He are not bright. Hell of a good worker, though. Hell of a nice fella, but he are not bright. I have knew him for a long time." Slim looked through George and beyond him. OF MICE AND MEN "Are not many guys travel around togerher," he mused. "I do not know why. Maybe ever'body in the whole damn world is scared of each other." "It is a lot nicer to go around with a guy you know," said George. A powerful, big-stomached man came into the bunk house. His head still dripped water from the scrubbing and dousing. "Hi, Slim," he said, and then stopped and stared at George and Lennie. "These guys jus' come," said Slim by way of introduction. "Glad ta meet ya," the big man said. "My name's Carlson." "I am George Milton. This here is Lennie Small." "Glad ta meet ya," Carlson said again. "He are not very small." He chuckled softly at his joke. "Are not small at all," he repeated. "Meant to ask you, Slim— how is your bitch? I seen she was not under your wagon this morning." OF MICE AND MEN "She slang her pups last night," said Slim. "Nine of them. I drowned four of them right off. She could not feed that many." "Got five left, huh?" "Yeah, five. I kept the biggest." "What kind of dogs you think they are going to be?" "I do not know," said Slim. "Some kind of shepherds, 'I guess. That is the most kind I seen around here when she was in heat." Carlson went on, "Got five pups, huh. Going To keep all of them?" "I do not know. Have to keep them a while so they can drink Lulu's milk." Carlson said thoughtfully, "Well, looka here, Slim. I been thinkin'. That dog of Candy's is so God damn old he cannot hardly walk. Stinks like hell, too. Ever' time he comes into the bunk house I can smell him for two, three days. Why 'n't you get Candy to shoot his old dog and give him one of the pups to raise up? I can smell that dog a mile away. Got no teeth, damn near OF MICE AND MEN blind, cannot cat. Candy feeds him milk. He cannot chew nothing else." George had been staring intently at Slim. Suddenly a triangle began to ring outside, slowly at first, and then faster and faster until the beat of it disappeared into one ringing sound. It stopped as suddenly as it had started. "There she goes," said Carlson. Outside, there was a burst of voices as a group of men went by. Slim stood up slowly and with dignity. "You guys better come on while they's still something to eat. Will not be nothing left in a couple of minutes." Carlson stepped back to let Slim precede him, and then the two of them went out the door. Lennie was watching George excitedly. George rumpled his cards into a messy pile. "Yeah!" George said, "I heard him, Lennie. I will ask him." "A brown and white one," Lennie cried excitedly. OF MICE AND MEN "Come on. Lc's get dinner. I do not know whether he got a brown and white one." Lcnnie did not move from his bunk. "You ask him right away, George, so he will not kill no more of them." "Sure. Come on now, get up on your feet." Lcnnie rolled off his bunk and stood up, and the two of them started for the door. Just as they reached it, Curley bounced in. "You seen a girl around here?" he demanded angrily. George said coldly. " 'Bout half an hour ago maybe." "Well what the hell was she doing?" George stood still, watching the angry little man. He said insultingly, "She said— she was lookin' for you." Curley seemed really to see George for the first time. His eyes flashed over George, took in his height, measured his reach, looked at his trim middle. "Well, which way'd she go?" he demanded at last. OF MICE AND MEN "I do not know," said George. "I didn' watch her g°- Curley scowled at him, and turning, hurried out the door. George said, "Ya know, Lennie, I am scared I am going to tangle with that bastard myself. I hate his guts. Jesus Christ! Come on. They will not be a damn thing left to eat." They went out the door. The sunshine lay in a thin line under the window. From a distance there could be heard a rattle of dishes. After a moment the ancient dog walked lamely in through the open door. He gazed about with mild, half-blind eyes. He sniffed, and then lay down and put his head between his paws. Curley popped into the doorway again and stood looking into the room. The dog raised his head, but when Curley jerked out, the grizzled head sank to the floor again. ALTHOUGH there was evening brightness showing through the windows of the bunk , house, inside it was dusk. Through the open door came the thuds and occasional clangs of a horseshoe game, and now and then the sound of voices raised in approval or derision. Slim and George came into the darkening bunkhouse together. Slim reached up over the card table and turned on the tin-shaded electric light. Instantly the table was brilliant with light, and the cone of the shade threw its brightness straight downward, leaving the comers of the bunk house still in dusk. Slim sat down on a box and George took his place opposite. "It was not nothing," said Slim. "I would of had to drowned most of them anyways. No need to thank me about that." OF MICE AND MEN George said, "It was not much to you, maybe, but it was a hell of a lot to him. Jesus Christ, I do not know how we are going to get him to sleep in here. He will want to sleep right out in the barn with them. We will have trouble keepin' him from getting right in the box with them pups." "It was not nothing," Slim repeated. "Say, you sure was right about him. Maybe he are not bright, but 1 never seen such a worker. He damn near killed his partner buckin' barley. There are not nobody can keep up with him. God awmighty I never seen such a strong guy." George spoke proudly. "Jus' tell Lennie what to do an' he will do it if it do not take no figuring. He cannot think of nothing to do himself, but he sure can take orders." There was a clang of horseshoe on iron stake outside and a little cheer of voices. Slim moved back slightly so the light was not on his face. "Funny how you an' him string along together." It was Slim's calm invitation to confidence. OF MICE AND MEN "What is funny about it?" George demanded defensively. "Oh, I do not know. Hardly none of the guys ever travel together. 1 hardly never seen two guys travel together. You know how the hands are, they just come in and get their bunk and work a month, and then they quit and go out alone. Never seem to give a damn about nobody. It jus' seems kind of funny a cuckoo like him and a smart little guy like you travelin' together." "IJc are not no cuckoo," said George. "He is dumb as hell, but he are not crazy. An' I are not so bright neither, or I would not be buckin' barley for my fifty and found. If I was bright, if I was even a little bit smart, I would have my own little place, an' I would be bringin' in my own crops, 'stead of doing all the work and not getting what comes up outa the ground." George fell silent. He wanted to talk. Slim neither encouraged nor discouraged him. He just sat back quiet and receptive. "It are not so funny, him an' me going aroun' toOF MICE AND MEN gether," George said at last. "Him and me was both born in Auburn. I knowed his Aunt Clara. She took him when he was a baby and raised him up. When his Aunt Clara died, Lennie just come along with me out workin'. Got kind of used to each other after a little while." "Uinm," said Slim. George looked over at Slim and saw the calm, God-like eyes fastened on him. "Funny," said George. "I used to have a hell of a lot of fun with 'i am. Used to play jokes on 'i am because he was too dumb to take care of 'imself. But he was too dumb even to know he had a joke played on him. I had fun. Made me seem God damn smart alongside of him. Why he would do any damn thing I tol' him. If I tol' him to walk over a cliff, over he would go. That was not so damn much fun after a while. He never got mad about it, neither. I have beat the hell outa him, and he coulda bust every bone in my body jus' with his han's, but he never lifted a finger against me." George's voice was taking on the tone of confession. "Tell you OF MICE AND MEN what made me stop that. One day a bunch of guys was standin' around up on the Sacramento River. I was feelin' pretty smart. I turns to Lennie and says, 'Jump in.' An' he jumps. Could not swim a stroke. He damn near drowned before we could get him. An' he was so damn nice to me for pullin' him out. Clean forgot I told him to jump in. Well, I are not done nothing like that no more." "He is a nice fella," said Slim. "Guy do not need no sense to be a nice fella. Seems to me sometimes it jus' works the other way around. Take a real smart guy and he are not hardly ever 9 nice fella." George stacked the scattered cards and began to lay out his solitaire hand. The shoes thudded on the ground outside. At the windows the light of the evening still made the window squares bright. "I are not got no people," George said. "I seen the guys that go around on the ranches alone. That are not no good. They do not have no fun. OF MICE AND MEN After a long time they get mean. They get wantin' to fight all the time." "Yeah, they get mean," Slim agreed. "They get so they do not want to talk to nobody." " 'Course Lennie's a God damn nuisance most of the time," said George. "But you get used to going around with a guy an' you cannot get rid of him." "He are not mean," said Slim. "1 can see Lcnnie are not a bit mean." " 'Course he are not mean. But he gets in trouble alia time because he is so God damn dumb. Like what happened in Weed " lie stopped, stopped in the middle of turning over a card. He looked alarmed and peered over at Slim. "You would not tell nobody?" "What did he do in Weed?" Slim asked calmly. "You wouldn' tell? .... No, 'course you wouldn'." "What did he do in Weed?" Slim asked again. "Well, lie seen this girl in a red dress. Dumb bastard like he is, he wants to touch ever'thing OF MICE AND MEN he likes. Just wants to feel it. So he reaches out to feel this red dress an' the girl let us out a squawk, and that gets Lennie all mixed up, and he holds on because that is the only thing he can think to do. Well, this girl squawks and squawks. I was jus' a little bit off, and I heard all the yellin', so I comes running, an' by that time Lennie's so scared all he can think to do is jus' hold on. 1 socked him over the head with a fence picket to make him let go. He was so scairt he could not let go of that dress. And he is so God damn strong, you know." Slim's eyes were level and unwinking. He nodded very slowly. "So what happens?" George carefully built his line of solitaire cards. "Well, that girl rabbits in an' tells the law she been raped. The guys in Weed start a party out to lynch Lennie. So we sit in a irrigation ditch under water all the rest of that day. Got on'y our heads sticking outa water, an' up under the grass that sticks out from the side of the ditch. An' that night we scrammed outa there." OF MICE AND MEN Slim sat in silence for a moment. "Did not hurt the girl none, huh?" he asked finally. "Hell, no. He just scared her. I would be scared too if he grabbed me. But he never hurt her. He jus' wanted to touch that red dress, like he wants to pet them pups all the time." "He are not mean," said Slim. "I can tell a mean guy a mile off." " 'Course he are not, and he will do any damn thing I " Lennie came in through the door. He wore his blue denim coat over his shoulders like a cape, and he walked hunched way over. "Hi, Lennie," said George. "How you like the pup now?" Lennie said breathlessly, "He is brown an' white jus' like I wanted." He went directly to his bunk and lay down and turned his face to the wall and drew up his knees. George put down his cards very deliberately. "Lennie," he said sharply. Lennie twisted his neck and looked over his shoulder. "Huh? What you want, George?" OF MICE AND MEN "I tol' you you could not bring that pup in here." "What pup, George? I are not got no pup." George went quickly to him, grabbed him by the shoulder and rolled him over. He reached down and picked the tiny puppy from where Lennie had been concealing it against his stomach. Lennie sat up quickly. "Give 'um to me, George." George said, "You get right up an' take this pup back to the nest. He is got to sleep with his mother. You want to kill him? Just bom last night an' you take him out of the nest. You take him back or I will tell Slim not to let you have him." Lennie held out his hands pleadingly. "Give 'um to me, George. I will take 'um back. I did not mean no harm, George. Honest I did not. I jus' wanted to pet 'um a little." George handed the pup to him. "Awright. You get him back there quick, and do not you OF MICE AND MEN take him out no more. You will kill him, the first thing you know." Lennie fairly scuttled out of the room. Slim had not moved. His calm eyes followed Lennie out the door. "Jesus," he said, "lie's jes' like a kid, are not he." "Sure he is jes' like a kid. There are not no more harm in him than a kid neither, except he is so strong. I bet he will not come in here to sleep tonight. He would sleep right alongside that box in the bam. Well— let 'i am. He are not doing no harm out there." It was almost dark outside now. Old Candy, the swamper, came in and went to his bunk, and behind him struggled his old dog. "Hello, Slim. Hello, George. Did not neither of you play horseshoes?" "I do not like to play ever' nig!-..," said Slim. Candy went on, "Either you guys got a. slug of whisky? I got to gut ache." "I are not," said Slim. "I would drink it myself if I had, an' I are not got a gut ache neither." OF MICE AND MEN "Got To bad gut ache," said Candy. "Them God damn turnips give it to me. 1 knowed they was going to before I ever eat them." The thick-bodied Carlson came in out of the darkening yard. He walked to the other end of the bunk house and turned on the second shaded light. "Darker'n hell in here," he said. "Jesus, how that nigger can pitch shoes." "He is plenty good," said Slim. "Damn right he is," said Carlson. "He do not give nobody else a chance to win " He stopped and sniffed the air, and still sniffing, looked down at the old dog. "God awmighty, that dog stinks. Get him outa here, Candy! I do not know nothing that stinks as bad as an old dog. You got to get him out." C;tw.V rolled to the edge of his bunk. He reached over : an( ] patted the ancient dog, and he apologized, "I been around him so much I nc*ver notic e how he stinks." -"Veil, I cannot stand him in here," said Carlson. "That stink hangs around even after he is If' OF MICE AND MEN gone. He walked over with his heavy-legged stride and looked down at the dog. "Got no teeth," he said. "He is all stiff with rheumatism. He are not no good to you, Candy. An' he are not no good to himself. Why'n't you shoot him. Candy?" The old man squirmed uncomfortably. "Well —hell! I had him so long. Had him since he was a pup. I herded sheep with him." He said proudly, "You would not think it to look at him now, but he was the best damn sheep dog 1 ever seen." George said, "I seen a guy in Weed that had an Airedale could he 1 *^- 1 vvent to his bd it from the other dogs." h' s °ld dog. "Hcl Carlson was not ' r neither of you pi a;. Candy. This old dog jus' si ;lf all the time. If you was to take him o ft a:' i shoo, said Sim. in the back of the head—" he Iear2 gory ' nd pointed, "—right there, why he would i/*, * o > w what hit him." ^ •t Candy looked about unhappily. "No," he said OF MICE AND MEN softly. "No, I couldn' do that. I had 'i am too long." "He do not have no fun," Carlson insisted. "And he stinks to beat hell. Tell you what. I will shoot him for you. Then it will not be you that does it." Candy threw his legs off his bunk. He scratched the white stubble whiskers on his cheek nervously. "I am so used to him," he said softly. "I had him from a pup." "Well, you are not bein' kind to him keepin' him alive," said Carlson. "Look, Slim's bitch got a litter right now. I bet Slim would give you one of them pups to raisr- i{ lm would not you. Slim?" The skinner hai' irr t j iat staying the old dog with his c J ah, rra , er out .'he said. "You can have a pup if you v ) r } ie rc j f de seemed to shake himself free for spi v ch. "Carl's right, Candy. That dog are not no good to himself. I wisht somebody'd shoot me if I get old an' a cripple." Candy looked helplessly at him, for Slim's opinions were law. "Maybe it would hurt him," he OF MICE AND MEN suggested. "I do not mind talcin' care of him." Carlson said, "The way I would shoot him, he would not feel nothing. I would put the gun right there." He pointed with his toe. "Right back of the head. He would not even quiver." Candy looked for help from face to face. It was quite dark outside by now. A young laboring man came in. His sloping shoulders were bent forward and he walked heavily on his heels, as though he carried the invisible grain bag. He went to his bunk and put his hat on his shelf. Then he picked a pulp magazine from his shelf and brought it to the light over the table. "Did I show you this, Slim?" he asked. "Show me what?" The young man turned to the back of the magazine, put it down on the table and pointed with his finger. "Right there, read that." Slim bent over it. "Go on," said the young man. "Read it out loud." " 'Dear Editor' Slim read slowly. " 'I read your mag for six years and I think it is the best OF MICE AND MEN on the market. I like stories by Peter Rand. I think he is a whing-ding. Give us more like the Dark Rider. I do not write many letters. Just thought I would tell you I think your mag is the best dime's worth I ever spent.' " Slim looked up questioningly. "What you want me to read that for?" Whit said, "Go on. Read the name at the bottom." Slim read, " 'Yours for success, William Tenner.' " He glanced up at Whit again. "What you want me to read that for?" Whit closed the magazine impressively. "Do not you remember Bill Tenner? Worked here about three months ago?" Slim thought. . . . "Little guy?" he asked. "Drove a cultivator?" "That is him," Whit cried. "That is the guy!" "You think he is the guy wrote this letter?" "I know it. Bill and me was in here one day. Bill had one of them books that just come. He was lookin' in it and he says, 'I wrote a letter. OF MICE AND MEN Wonder if they put it in the book!' But it was not there. Bill says, 'Maybe they are savin' it for later.' An' that is just what they done. There it is." "Guess you are right," said Slim. "Got it right In the book." George held out his hand for the magazine. "Let us look at it?" Whit found the place again, but he did not surrender his hold on it. He pointed out the letter with his forefinger. And then he went to his box shelf and laid the magazine carefully in. "I wonder if Bill seen it," he said. "Bill and me worked in that patch of field peas. Run cultivators, both of us. Bill was a hell of a nice fella." During the conversation Carlson had refused to be drawn in. He continued to look down at the old dog. Candy watched him uneasily. At last Carlson said, "If you want me to, I will put the old devil out of his misery right now and get it over with. Are not nothing left for him. Cannot eat, cannot see, cannot even walk without hurtin'." Candy said hopefully, "You are not got no gun." OF MICE AND MEN "The hell I are not. Got a Luger. It will not hurt him none at all." Candy said, "Maybe tomorra. Le's wait till tomorra." "I do not see no reason for it," said Carlson. He went to his bunk, pulled his bag from underneath it and took out a Luger pistol. "Le's get it over with," he said. "We cannot sleep with him stinkin' around in here." He put the pistol in his hip pocket. Candy looked a long time at Slim to try to find some reversal. And Slim gave him none. At last Candy said softly and hopelessly, "Awright —take 'i am." He did not look down at the dog at all. He lay back on his bunk and crossed his arms behind his head and stared at the ceiling. From his pocket Carlson took a little leather thong. He stooped over and tied it around the old dog's neck. All the men except Candy watched him. "Come boy. Come on, boy," he said gently. And he said apologetically to Candy, "He will not even feel it." Candy did not move nor answer him. He twitched the thong. "Come OF MICE AND MEN on, boy." The old dog got slowly and stiffly to his feet and followed the gently pulling leash. Slim said, "Carlson." "Yeah?" "You know what to do." "What ya mean, Slim?" "Take a shovel," said Slim shortly. "Oh, sure! I get you." l ie led the dog out into the darkness. George followed to the door and shut the door and set the latch gently in its place. Candy lay rigidly on his bed staring at the ceiling. Slim said loudly, "One of my lead mules got a bad hoof. Got to get some tar on it." His voice trailed off. It was silent outside. Carlson's footsteps died away. The silence come into the room. And the silence lasted. George chuckled, "I bet Lennie's right out there in the barn with his pup. He will not want to come in here no more now he is got a pup." Slim said, "Candy, you can have any one of them pups you want." OF MICE AND MEN Candy did not answer. The silence fell on the room again. It came out of the night and invaded the room. George said, "Anybody like to play a little euchre?" "I will play out a few with you," said Whit. They took places opposite each other at the table under the light, but George did not shuffle the cards. He rippled the edge of the deck nervously, and the little snapping noise drew the eves of all the men in the room, so that he stopped doing it. The silence fell on the room again. A minute passed, and another minute. Candy lay still, staring at the ceiling. Slim gazed at him for a moment and then looked down at his hands; he subdued one hand with the other, and held it down. There came a little gnawing sound from under the floor and all the men looked down toward it gratefully. Only Candy continued to stare at the ceiling. "Sounds like there was a rat under there," said George. "We ought to get a trap down there." OF MICE AND MEN Whit broke out, "What the hell's takin' him so long? Lay out some cards, why do not you? We are not going to get no euchre played this way." George brought the cards together tightly and studied the backs of them. The silence was in the room again. A shot sounded in the distance. The men looked quickly at the old man. Every head turned toward him. For a moment he continued to stare at the ceiling. Then he rolled slowly over and faced the wall and lay silent. George shuffled the cards noisily and dealt them. Whit drew a scoring board to him and set the pegs to start. Whit said, "I guess you guys really come here to work." "How do ya mean?" George asked. Whit laughed. "Well, ya come on a Friday. You got two days to work till Sunday." "I do not see how you figure," said George. Whit laughed again. "You do if you been OF MICE AND MEN around these big ranches much. Guy that wants to look over a ranch comes in Sat'day afternoon. He gets Sat'day night supper an' three meals on Sunday, and he can quit Monday morain' after breakfast without turning his hand. But you come to work Friday noon. You got to put in a day an' a half no matter how you figure." George looked at him levelly. "We are going to stick aroun' a while," he said. "Me an' Lennie's going to roll up a stake." The door opened quietly and the stable buck put in his head; a lean negro head, lined with pain, the eyes patient. "Mr. Slim." Slim took his eyes from old Candy. "Huh? Oh! Hello, Crooks. What is'a matter?" "You told me to warm up tar for that mule's foot. I got it warm." "Oh! Sure, Crooks. I will come right out an' put it on." "I can do it if you want, Mr. Slim." "No. I will come do it myself." He stood up. Crooks said, "Mr. Slim." OF MICE AND MEN "Yeah." "That big new guy's rnessin' around your pups out in the bam." "Well, he are not doing no harm. I give him one of them pups." "Just thought I would tell ya," said Crooks. "He is takin' them outa the nest and handlin' them. That will not do them no good." "He will not hurt them," said Slim. "I will come along with you now." George looked up. "If that crazy bastard's foolin' around too much, jus' kick him out, Slim." Slim followed the stable buck out of the room. George dealt and Whit picked up his cards and examined them. "Seen the new kid yet?" he asked. "What kid?" George asked. "Why, Curley's new wife." "Yeah, I seen her." 'Well, are not she a looloo?" OF MICE AND MEN "I are not seen that much of her," said George. Whit laid down his cards impressively. "Well, stick around an' keep your eyes open. You will see plenty. She are not concealin' nothing. I never seen nobody like her. She got the eye going all the time on everybody. I bet she even gives the stable buck the eye. I do not know what the hell she wants." George asked casually, "Been any trouble since she got here?" It was obvious that Whit was not interested in his cards. He laid his hand down and George scooped it in. George laid out his deliberate solitaire hand— seven cards, and six on top, and live on top of those. Whit said, "I see what you mean. No, they are not been nothing yet. Curley's got yella-jackets in his drawers, but that is all so far. Ever' time the guys is around she shows up. She is lookin' for Curley, or she thought she lef' something Iayin' around and she is lookin' for it. Seems like she cannot keep away from guys. An' Curley's 9i OF MICE AND MEN pants is just crawlin' with ants, but they are not nothing come of it yet." George said, "She is going to make a mess. They's going to be a bad mess about her. She is a jail bait all set on the trigger. That Curley got his work cut out for him. Ranch with a bunch of guys on it are not no place for a girl, specially like her." Whit said, "If you got idears, you ought ta come in town with us guys tomorra night." "Why? What is doing?"* "Jus' the usual thing. We go in to old Susy's place. Hell of a nice place. Old Susy's a laugh— always crackin' jokes. Like she says when we come up on the front porch las' Sat'day night. Susy opens the door and then she yells over her shoulder, 'Get yor coats on, girls, here comes the sheriff.' She never talks dirty, neither. Got five girls there." "What is it set you back?" George asked. "Two an' a half. You can get a shot for two bits. Susy got nice chairs to set in, too. If a guy OF MICE AND MEN do not want a flop, why he can just set in the chairs and have a couple or three shots and pass the time of day and Susy do not give a damn. She are not rushin' guys through and kickin' them out if they do not want a flop." "Might go in and look the joint over," said George. "Sure. Come along. It is a hell of a lot of fun— her crackin' jokes all the time. Like she says one time, she says, 'I have knew people that if they got a rag rug on the floor an' a kewpie doll lamp on the phonograph they think they are running a parlor house.' That is Clara's house she is talkin' about. An' Susy says, 'I know what you boys want,' she says. 'My girls is clean,' she says, 'an' there are not no water in my whisky,' she says. 'If any you guys wanta look at a kewpie doll lamp an' take your own chance gettin' burned, why you know where to go.' An' she says, 'There is guys around here walkin' bow-legged because they like to look at a kewpie doll lamp.' " OF MICE AND MEN George asked, "Clara runs the other house, huh?" "Yeah," said Whit. "We do not never go there. Clara gets three bucks a crack and thirty-five cents a shot, and she do not crack no jokes. But Susy's place is clean and she got nice chairs. Do not let no goo-goos in, neither." "Me an' Lennic's rollin' up a stake," said George. "I might go in an' set and have a shot, bur I are not puttin' out no two and a half." "Well, a guy got to have some fun sometime," said Whit. The door opened and Lennie and Carlson came in together. Lennie crept to his bunk and sat down, trying not to attract attention. Carlson reached under his bunk and brought out his bag. He did not look at old Candy, who still faced the wall. Carlson found a little cleaning rod in the bag and a can of oil. He laid them on his bed and then brought out the pistol, took out the magazine and snapped the loaded she will from the chamber. Then he fell to cleaning the barrel OF MICE AND MEN with the little rod. When the ejector snapped. Candy turned over and looked for a moment at the gun before he turned back to the wall again. Carlson said casually, "Curley been in yet?" "No," said Whit. "What is eatin' on Curley?" Carlson squinted down the barrel of his gun. "Lookin' for his old lady. I seen him going round and round outside." Whit said sarcastically, "He spends half his time lookin' for her, and the rest of the time she is lookin' for him." Curley burst into the room excitedly. "Any you guys seen my wife?" he demanded. "She are not been here," said Whit. Curley looked threateningly about the room. "Where the hell's Slim?" "Went out in the bam," said George. "He was going to put some tar on a split hoof." Curley's shoulders dropped and squared. "How long ago'd he go?" "Five— ten minutes." Curley jumped out the door and banged it after him. ' OF MICE AND MEN Whit stood up. "I guess maybe I would like to see this," he said. "Curley's just spoilin' or he would not start for Slim. An' Curley's handy, God damn handy. Got in the finals for the Golden Gloves. He got newspaper clippings about it." He considered. "But jus' the same, he better leave Slim alone. Nobody do not know what Slim can do." "Thinks Slim's with his wife, do not he?" said George. "Looks like it," Whit said. " 'Course Slim are not. Least I do not think Slim is. But 1 like to see the fuss if it comes off. Come on, le's go." George said, "I am stayin' right here. I do not want to get mixed up in nothing. Lennie and me got to make a stake." Carlson finished the cleaning of the gun and put it in the bag and pushed the bag under his bunk. "I guess I will go out and look her over," he said. Old Candy lay still, and Lennie, from his bunk, watched George cautiously. When Whit and Carlson were gone and the OF MICE AND MEN door closed after them, George turned to Lennie. "What you got on your mind?" "1 are not done nothing, George. Slim says I better not pet them pups so much for a while. Slim says it are not good for them; so I come right in. I been good, George." "I coulda told you that," said George. "Well, 1 was not hurtin' them none. I jus' had mine in my lap pettin' it." George asked, "Did you see Slim out in the barn?" "Sure I did. He toF me 1 better not pet that pup no more." "Did you see that girl?" "You mean Curley's girl?" "Yeah. Did she come in the bam?" "No. Anyways I never seen her." "You never seen Slim talkin' to her?" "Uh-uh. She are not been in the barn." "O.K.," said George. "I guess them guys are not going to see no fight. If there is any fightin', Lennie, you keep out of it." OF MICE AND MEN "I do not want no fights," said Lennie. He got up from his bunk and sat down at the table, across from George. Almost automatically George shuffled the cards and laid out his solitaire hand. He used a deliberate, thoughtful, slowness. Lennie reached for a face card and studied it, then turned it upside down and studied it. "Both ends the same," he said. "George, why is it both end's the same?" "I do not know," said George. "That is jus' the way they make them. What was Slim doing in the bam when you seen him?" "Slim?" "Sure. You seen him in the bam, an' he tol' you not to pet the pups so much." ' "Oh, yeah. He had a can a' tar an' a paint brush. I do not know what for." "You sure that girl did not come in like she come in here today?" "No. She never come." George sighed. "You give me a good whore OF MICE AND MEN house every time," he said. "A guy can go in an' get drunk and get ever'thing outa his system all at once, an' no messes. And he knows how much it is going to set him back. These here jail baits is just set on the trigger of the hoosegow." Lennie followed his words admiringly, and moved his lips a little to keep up. George continued, "You remember Andy Cushman, Lennie? Went to grammar school?" "The one that his old lady used to make hot cakes for the kids?" Lennie asked. "Yeah. That is the one. You can remember anything if there is anything to eat in it." George looked carefully at the solitaire hand. He put an ace up on his scoring rack and piled a two, three and four of diamonds on it. "Andy's in San Quentin right now on account of a tart," said^ George. Lennie drummed on the table with his fingers. "George?" "Huh?" "George, how long's it going to be till we get OF MICE AND MEN that little place an' live on the fatta the lan— an' rabbits?" "I don' know," said George. "We got to get a big stake together. I know a little place we can get cheap, but they are not givin' it away." Old Candy turned slowly over. His eyes were wide open. He watched George carefully. Lennie said, "Tell about that place, George." "I jus' toP you, jus' las' night." "Go on— tell again, George." "Well, it is ten acres," said George. "Got a little win 'mill. Got a little shack on it, an' a chicken run. Got a kitchen, orchard, cherries, apples, peaches, 'cots, nuts, got a few berries. They's a place for alfalfa and plenty water to flood it. They's a pig pen — " "An' rabbits, George." "No place for rabbits now, but I could easy build a few hutches and you could feed alfalfa to the rabbits." "Damn right, I could," said Lennie. "You God damn right I could." too OF MICE AND MEN /George's hands stopped working with the cards. His voice was growing warmer. "An' we could have a few pigs. I could build a smoke house like the one gran'pa had, an' when we lull a pig we can smoke the bacon and the hams, and make sausage an' all like that. An' when the salmon run up river we could catch a hundred of them an' salt them down or smoke them. We could have them for breakfast. They are not nothing so nice as smoked salmon. When the fruit come in we could can it— and tomatoes, they are easy to can. Ever' Sunday we would kill a chicken or a rabbit. Maybe we would have a cow or a goat, and the cream is so God damn thick you got to cut it with a knife and take it out with a spoon." Lennie watched him with wide eves, and old Candy watched him too. Lennie said softly, "We could live offa the fatta the lan'." "Sure," said George. "All kin's a vegetables in the garden, and if we want a little whisky we can sell a few eggs or something, or some milk. We would jus' live there. We would belong there. IOI OF MICE AND MEN There would not be no more runnin' round the country and gettin' fed by a Jap cook. No, sir, we would have our own place where we belonged and not sleep in no bunk house." "Tell about the house, George," Lennie begged. "Sure, we would have a little house an' a room to ourself. Little fat iron stove, an' in the winter we would keep a fire going in it. It are not enough land so we would have to work too hard. Maybe six, seven hours a day. We would not have to buck no barley eleven hours a day. An' when we put in a crop, why, we would be there to take the crop up. We would know what come of our planting." "An' rabbits," Lennie said eagerly. "An' I would take care of them. Tell how I would do that, George." "Sure, you would go out in the alfalfa patch an' you would have a sack. You would fill up the sack and bring it in an' put it in the rabbit cages." "They would nibble an' they would nibble," said Lennie, "the way they do. I seen them." "Ever' six weeks or so," George continued, OF MICE AND MEN "them docs would throw a litter so we would have plenty rabbits to eat an' to sell. An' we would keep a few pigeons to go flyin' around the win'mill like they done when I was a kid." He looked raptly at the wall over Lcnnie's head. "An' it would be our own, an' nobody could can us. If we do not like a guy we can say, 'Get the hell out,' and by God he is got to do it. An' if a fren' come along, why we would have an extra bunk, an' we would say, 'Why do not you spen' the night?' an' by God he would. We would have a setter dog and a couple stripe cats, but you got to watch out them cats do not get the little rabbits." Lennic breathed hard. "You jus' let them try to get the rabbits. I will break their God damn necks. I will .... I will smash them with a stick." He subsided, grumbling to himself, threatening the future cats which might dare to disturb the future rabbits. George sat entranced with his own picture. When Candy spoke they both jumped as OF MICE AND MEN though they had been caught doing something reprehensible. Candy said, "You know where is a place like that?" George was on guard immediately. "S'pose I do," he said. "What is that to you?" "You do not need to tell me where it is at. Might be any place." "Sure," said George. "That is right. You could not find it in a hundred years." Candy went on excitedly, "How much they want for a place like that?" George watched him suspiciously. "Well— I could get it for six hundred bucks. The old people that owns it is flat bust an' the old lady needs an operation. Say— what is it to you? You got nothing to do with us." Candy said, "I are not much good with on'y one hand. I lost my hand right here on this ranch. That is why they give me a job swampin'. An' they give me two hunderd an' fifty dollars because I los' my hand. An' I got fifty more saved up right in the bank, right now. Tha's three OF MICE AND MEN hunderd, and I got fifty more cornin' the end a the month. Tell you what- — " He leaned forward eagerly. "S'pose I went in with you guys. Tha's three hunderd an' fifty bucks I would put in. I are not much good, but I could cook and tend the chickens and hoe the garden some. How did that be?" George half-closed his eyes. "I got to think about that. We was always going to do it by ourselves." Candy interrupted him, "I would make a will an' leave my share to you guys in case I kick off, because I are not got no relatives nor nothing. You guys got any money? Maybe we could do her right now?" George spat on the floor disgustedly. "We got ten bucks between us." Then he said thoughtfully, "Look, if me an' Lennie work a month an' do not spen' nothing, we will have a hunderd bucks. That would be four fifty. I bet we could swing her for that. Then you an' Lennie could go get her started an' I would get a job an' make up OF MICE AND MEN the res', an' you could sell eggs an' stuff like that." They fell into a silence. They looked at one another, amazed. This thing they had never really believed in was coining true. George said reverently, "Jesus Christ! I bet we could swing her." His eyes were full of wonder. "I bet we could swing her," he repeated softly. Candy sat on the edge of his bunk. He scratched the stump of his wrist nervously. "I got hurt four year ago," he said. "They will can me purty soon. Jus' as soon as 1 cannot swamp out no bunk houses they will put me on the county. Maybe if I give you guys my money, you will let me hoe in the garden even after I are not no good at it. An' I will wash dishes an' little chicken stuff like that. But I will be on our own place, an' I will be let to work on our own place." He said miserably, "You seen what they done to my dog tonight? They says he was not no good to himself nor nobody else. When they can me here I wisht somebody would shoot me. But they will not do nothOF MICE AND MEN ing like that. 1 will not have no place to go, an' I cannot get no more jobs. I will have thirty dollars more cornin', time you guys is ready to quit." George stood up. "We will do her," he said. "We will fix up that little old place an' we will go live there." He sat down again. They all sat still, all bemused by the beauty of the thing, each mind was popped into the future when this lovely thing should come about. George said wonderingly, "S'posc they was a carnival or a circus come to town, or a ball game, or any damn thing." Old Candy nodded in appreciation of the idea. "We would just go to her," George said. "We would not ask nobody if we could. Jus' say, 'We will go to her,' an' we would. Jus' milk the cow and sling some grain to the chickens an' go to her." "An' put some grass to the rabbits," Lennie broke in. "I would not never forget to feed them. When we gon'ta do it, George?" "In one month. Right squack in one month. Know what I am gon'ta do? I am gon'ta write to OF MICE AND MEN them old people that owns the place that we will take it. An' Candy'll send a hunderd dollars to bind her." "Sure will," said Candy. "They got a good stove there?" "Sure, got a nice stove, bums coal or wood." "I am going to take my pup," said Lennie. "1 bet by Christ he likes it there, by Jesus." Voices were approaching from outside. George said quickly, "Do not tell nobody about it. Jus' us three an' nobody else. They li'ble to can us so we cannot make no stake. Jus' go on like we was going to buck barley the rest of our lives, then all of a sudden some day we will go get our pay an' scram outa here." Lennie and Candy nodded, and they were grinning with delight. "Do not tell nobody," Lennie said to himself. Candy said, "George." "Huh?" "I ought to of shot that dog myself, George. I should not ought to of let no stranger shoot my dog." OF MICE AND MEN The door opened. Slim came in, followed by Curley and Carlson and Whit. Slim's hands were black with tar and he was scowling. Curley hung close to his elbow. Curley said, "Well, I did not mean nothing. Slim. I just ast you." Slim said, "Well, you been askin' me too often. I am gettin' God damn sick of it. If you cannot look after your own God damn wife, what you expect me to do about it? You lay off a me. "I am jus' tryin' to tell you I did not mean nothing," said Curley. "I jus' thought you might of saw her." "Why'n't you tell her to stay the hell home where she belongs?" said Carlson. "You let her hang around bunk houses and pretty soon you are going to have som'pin on your hands and you will not be able to do nothing about it." Curley whirled on Carlson. "You keep outta this les' you wanta step outside." Carlson laughed. "You God damn punk." he OF MICE AND MEN said. "You tried to throw a scare into Slim, an' you could not make it stick. Slim throwed a scare inta you. You are yella as a frog belly. 1 do not care if you are the best welter in the country. You come for me, an' I will kick your God damn head off." Candy joined the attack with joy. "Glove fulia vaseline," he said disgustedly. Curley glared at him. His eyes slipped on past and lighted on Lennie; and Lcnnie was still smiling with delight at the memory of the ranch. Curley stepped over to Lennie like a terrier. "What the hell you laughin' at?" Lennie looked blankly at him. "Huh?" Then Curley's rage exploded. "Come on, ya big bastard. Get up on your feet. No big son-of- a-bitch is going to laugh at me. I will show ya who is yella." Lennie looked helplessly at George, and then he got up and tried to retreat. Curley was balanced and poised. He slashed at Lennie with his left, and then smashed down his nose with a no OF MICE AND MEN right. Lennie gave a cry of terror. Blood welled from his nose. "George," he cried. "Make 'um let me alone, George." He backed until he was against the wall, and Curley followed, slugging him in the face. Lennie's hands remained at his sides-, he was too frightened to defend himself. George was on his feet yelling, "Get him, Lennie. Do not let him do it." Lennie covered his face with his huge paws and bleated with terror. He cried, "Make 'um stop, George." Then Curley attacked his stomach and cut off his wind. Slim jumped up. "The dirty little rat," he cried, "i will get 'um myself." George put out his hand and grabbed Slim. "Wait a minute," he shouted. He cupped his hands around his mouth and yelled, "Get 'i am, Lennie!" Lennie took his hands away from his face and looked about for George, and Curley slashed at his eyes. The big face was covered with blood. George yelled again, "I said get him." ui OF MICE AND MEN Curley's fist was swinging when Lcnnie reached for it. The next minute Curley was flopping like a fish on a line, and his closed fist was lost in Lennie's big hand. George ran down the room. "Leggo of him, Lennie. Let go." But Lennie watched in terror the flopping little man whom he held. Blood ran down Lennie's face, one of his eyes was cut and closed. George slapped him in the face again and again, and still Lennie held on to the closed fist. Curley was white and shrunken by now, and his struggling had become weak. He stood crying, his fist lost in Lennie's paw. George shouted over and over, "Leggo his hand, Lennie. Leggo. Slim, come help me while the guy got any hand left." Suddenly Lennie let go his hold. He crouched cowering against the wall. "You tol' me to, George," he said miserably. Curley sat down on the floor, looking in wonder at his crushed hand. Slim and Carlson bent over him. Then Slim straightened up and reOF MICE AND MEN garded Lennie with horror. "We got to get him in to a doctor," he said. "Looks to me like ever' bone in his han' is bust." "I did not wanta," Lennie cried. "I did not wanta hurt him." Slim said, "Carlson, you get the candy wagon hitched up. We will take 'um into Soledad an' get 'um fixed up." Carlson hurried out. Slim turned to the whimpering Lennie. "It are not your fault," he said. "This punk sure had it cornin' to him. But— Jesus! He are not hardly got no han' left." Slim hurried out, and in a moment returned with a tin cup of water. He held it to Curley's lips. George said, "Slim, will we get canned now? We need the stake. Will Curley's old man can us now?" Slim smiled wryly. He knelt down beside Curley. "You got your senses in hand enough to listen?" he asked. Curley nodded. "Well, then listen," Slim went on. "I think you got your han' caught in a machine. If you do not 1x3 OF MICE AND MEN tell nobody what happened, we are not going to. But you jus' tell an' try to get this guy canned and we will tell ever'body, an' then will you get the laugh." "I will not tell," said Curley. He avoided looking at Lennie. Buggy wheels sounded outside. Slim helped Curley up. "Come on now. Carlson's going to take you to a doctor." lie helped Curley out the door. The sound of wheels drew away. In a moment Slim came back into the bunk house. He looked at Lennie, still crouched fearfully against the wall. "Le's see your hands," he asked. Lennie stuck out his hands. "Christ awmighty, I hate to have you mad at me," Slim said. George broke in, "Lennie was jus' scairt," he explained. "He did not know what to do. I told you nobody ought never to fight him. No, I guess it was Candy I told." Candy nodded solemnly. "That is jus' what you done," he said. "Right this morning when OF MICE AND MEN Curley first lit intil your fren\ you says, 'He better not fool with Lennie if he knows what is good for 'um.' That is jus' what you says to me." George turned to Lennie. "It are not your fault," he said. "You do not need to be scairt no more. You done jus' what 1 tol' you to. Maybe you better go in the wash room an' clean up your face. You look like hell." Lennie smiled with his bruised mouth. "I did not want no trouble," he said. He walked toward the door, but just before he came to it, he turned back. "George?" "What you want?" "I can still tend the rabbits, George?" "Sure. You are not done nothing wrong." "I di'n't mean no harm, George." "Well, get the hell out and wash your face." CROOKS, the negro stable buck, had his bunk in the harness room; a little she would that leaned off the wall of the bam. On one side of the little room there was a square four-paned window, and on the other, a narrow plank door leading into the barn. Crooks' bunk was a long box filled with straw, on which his blankets were flung. On the wall by the window there were pegs on which hung broken harness in process of being mended; strips of new leather; and under the window itself a little bench for leather-working tools, curved knives and needles and balls of linen thread, and a small hand riveter. On pegs were also pieces of harness, a split collar with the horsehair stuffing sticking out, a broken hame, and a trace chain with its leather OF MICE AND MEN covering split. Crooks had his apple box over his bunk, and in it a range of medicine bottles, both for himself and for the horses. There were cans of saddle soap and a drippy can of tar with its paint, brush sticking over the edge. And scattered about the floor were a number of personal possessions; for, being alone, Crooks could leave his things about, and being a stable buck and a cripple, he was more permanent than the other men, and he had accumulated more possessions than he could carry on his hack. Crooks possessed several pairs of shoes, a pair of rubber boots, a big alarm clock and a singlebarreled shotgun. And lie had books, too; a tattered dictionary and a mauled copy of the California civil code for 1905. There were battered magazines and a few dirty books on a special shelf over his bunk. A pair of large gold-rimmed spectacles hung from a nail on the wall above his bed. This room was swept and fairly neat, for Crooks was a proud, aloof man. He kept his disOF MICE AND MEN tance and demanded that other people keep theirs. His body was bent over to the left by his crooked spine, and his eyes lay deep in his head, and because of their depth seemed to glitter with intensity. His lean face was lined with deep black wrinkles, and he had thin, pain-tightened lips which were lighter than his face. It was Saturday night. Through the open door that led into the barn came the sound of moving horses, of feet stirring, of teeth champing on hay, of the rattle of halter chains. In the stable buck's room a small electric globe threw a meager yellow light. Crooks sat on his bunk. His shirt was out of his jeans in back. In one hand he held a bottle of liniment, and with the other he rubbed his spine. Now and then he poured a few drops of the liniment into his pink-palmed hand and reached up under his shirt to rub again. He flexed his muscles against his back and shivered. Noiselessly Lennie appeared in the open doorway and stood there looking in, his big shoulders OF MICE AND MEN nearly filling the opening. For a moment Crooks did not sec him, but on raising his eyes he stiffened and a scowl came on his face. His hand came out from under his shirt. Lennie smiled helplessly in an attempt to make friends. Crooks said sharply, "You got no right to come in my room. This here is my room. Nobody got any right in here but me." Lennie gulped and his smile grew more fawning. "I are not doing nothing," he said. "Just come to look at my puppy. And 1 seen your light," he explained. "Well, 1 got a right to have a light. You go on get outta my room. I are not wanted in the bunk house, and you are not wanted in my room." "Why are not you wanted?" Lennie asked. " Because I am black. They play cards in there, but I cannot play because I am black. They say I stink. Well, I tell you, you all of you stink to me." Lennie flapped his big hands helplessly. OF MICE AND MEN "Ever'body went into town," he said. "Slim an' George an' ever'body. George says I got to stay here an' not get in no trouble. I seen your light." "Well, what do you want?" "Nothing— I seen your light. I thought I could jus' come in an' set." Crooks stared at Lcnnie, and he readied behind him and took down the spectacles and adjusted them over his pink ears and stared again. "I do not know what you are doing in the bam anyway," he complained. "You are not no skinner. They's no call for a bucker to come into the barn at all. You are not no skinner. You are not got nothing to do with the horses." "The pup," Lennic repeated. "I come to see my pup." "Well, go see your pup, then. Do not come in a place where you are not wanted." Lennie lost his smile. He advanced a step into the room, then remembered and backed to the OF MICE AND MEN door again. "I looked at them a little. Slim says I are not to pet them very much." Crooks said, "Well, you been takin' them out of the nest all the time. 1 wonder the old lady do not move them someplace else." "Oh, she do not care. She let us me." Lennie had moved into the room again. Crooks scowled, but Lcnnic's disarming smile defeated him. "Come on in and set a while," Crooks said. " 'Long as you will not get out and leave me alone, you might as well set down." His tone was a little more friendly. "All the boys gone inro town, huh?" "All but old Candy. He just sets in the bunk house sharpening his pencil and sharpening and figuring." Crooks adjusted his glasses. "Figuring? What is Candy figuring about?" Lennie almost shouted, " 'Bout the rabbits." "You are nuts," said Crooks. "You are crazy as a wedge. What rabbits you talkin' about?" "Xhe rabbits we are going to get, and I get to OF MICE AND MEN tend them, cut grass an' give them water, an' like that." "Jus' nuts," said Crooks. "1 do not blame the guy you travel with for keepin' you outa sight." Lennic said quietly, "It are not no lie. We are going to do it. Going To get a little place an' live on the fatta the lan'." Crooks settled himself more comforrably on his bunk. "Set down," he invited. "Set down on the nail keg." Lennie hunched down on the little barrel. "You think it is a lie," Lennie said, "But it are not no lie. Ever' word's the truth, an' you can ast George." Crooks put his dark chin into his pink palm. "You travel aroun' with George, do not ya?" "Sure. Me an' him goes ever' place together." Crooks continued. "Sometimes he talks, and you do not know what the hell he is talkin' about. Are not that so?" He leaned forward, boring Lennie with his deep eyes. "Are not that so?" "Yeah .... sometimes." OF MICE AND MEN "Jus' talks on, an' you do not know what the hell it is all about?" "Yeah .... sometimes. But .... not always." Crooks leaned forward over the edge of the bunk. "I are not a southern negro," he said. "I was bom right here in California. My old man had a chicken ranch, 'bout ten acres. The white kids come to play at our place, an' sometimes I went to play with them, and some of them was pretty nice. My old man did not like that. I never knew till long later why he did not like that. But I know now." He hesitated, and when he spoke again his voice was softer. "There was not another colored family for miles around. And now there are not a colored man on this ranch an' there is jus' one family in Soledad." He laughed. "If I say something, why it is just a nigger sayin' it." Lcnnie asked, "Flow long you think it will be before them pups will be old enough to pet?" Crooks laughed again. "A guy can talk to you OF MICE AND MEN an' be sure you will not go blabbin'. Couple of weeks an' them pups'll be all right. George knows what he is about. Jus' talks, an' you do not understand nothing." He leaned forward excitedly. "This is just a nigger talkin', an' a bustcd-back nigger. So it do not mean nothing, see? You could not remember it anyways. 1 seen it over an' over— a guy talkin' to another guy and it do not make no difference if he do not hear or understand. The thing is, they are talkin', or they are settin' still not talkin'. It do not make no difference, no difference." His excitement had increased until he pounded his knee with this hand. "George can tell you screwy things, and it do not matter. It is just the talking. It is just bein' with another guy. That is all." He paused. His voice grew soft and persuasive. "S'pose George do not come back no more. S'pose he took a powder and just are not coming back. What will you do then?" Lennie's attention came gradually to what had been said. "What?" he demanded. X2 4 OF MICE AND MEN "I said s'pose George went into town tonight and you never heard of him no more." Crooks pressed forward some kind of private victory. "Just s'pose that," he repeated. "He will not do it," Lennie cried. "George would not do nothing like that. I been with George a long time. He will come back tonight — " But the doubt was too much for him. "Do not you think he will?" Crooks' face lighted with pleasure in his torture. "Nobody cannot tell what a guy'll do," he observed calmly. "Le's say he wants to come back and cannot. S'pose he gets killed or hurt so he cannot come back." Lennie struggled to understand. "George will not do nothing like that," he repeated. "George is careful. He will not get hurt. He are not never been hurt, because he is careful." "Well, s'pose, jus' s'pose he do not come back. What will you do then?" Lennie's face wrinkled with apprehension. "I don' know. Say, what you doing anyways?" he OF MICE AND MEN cried. "This are not true. George are not got hurt." Crooks bored in on him. "Want me ta tell ya what will happen? They will take ya to the booby hatch. They will tie ya up with a collar, like a dog." Suddenly Lennie's eyes centered and grew quiet, and inad. He stood up and walked dangerously toward Crooks. "Who hurt George?" he demanded. Crooks saw the danger as it approached him. He edged back on his bunk to get out of the way. "I was just supposin'," he said. "George are not hurt. He is all right. He will be back all right." Lennie stood over him. "What you supposin' for? Are not nobody going to suppose no hurt to George." Crooks removed his glasses and wiped his eyes with his fingers. "Jus' set down," he said. "George are not hurt." Lennie growled back to his seat on the nail OF MICE AND MEN keg. "Are not nobody going to talk no hurt to George," he grumbled. Crooks said gently, "Maybe you can see now. You got George. You know he is going to come back. S'pose you did not have nobody. S'pose you could not go into the bunk house and play rummy because you was black. How did you like that? S'pose you had to sit out here an' read books. Sure you could play horseshoes till it got dark, but then you got to read books. Books are not no good. A guy needs somebody— to be near him." He whined, "A guy goes nuts if he are not got nobody. Do not make no difference who the guy is, long's he is with you. I tell ya," he cried, "I tell ya a guy gets too lonely an' he gets sick." "George going to come back," Lennie reassured himself in a frightened voice. "Maybe George come back already. Maybe I better go see." Crooks said, "I did not mean to scare you. He will come back. I was talkin' about myself. A OF MICE AND MEN guy sets alone out here at night, maybe readin' books or thinkin' or stuff like that. Sometimes he gets thinkin', an' he got nothing to tell him what is so an' what are not so. Maybe if he sees something, he do not know whether it is right or not. He cannot turn to some other guy and ast him if he sees it too. He cannot tell. He got nothing to measure by. I seen things out here. I was not drunk. I do not know if I was asleep. If some guy was with me, he could tell me I was asleep, an' then it would be all right. But I jus' do not know." Crooks was looking across the room now, looking toward the window. Lennie said miserably, "George wun't go away and leave me. I know George wun't do that." The stable buck went on dreamily, "I remember when I was a little kid on my old man's chicken ranch. Had two brothers. They was always near me, always there. Used to sleep right in the same room, right in the same bed— all three. Had a strawberry patch. Had an alfalfa OF MICE AND MEN parch. Used to turn the chickens out in the aifalfa on a sunny morning. My brothers'd set on a fence rail an' watch them— white chickens they was." Gradually Lennie's interest came around to what was being said. "George says we are going to have aifalfa for the rabbits." "What rabbits?" "We are going to have rabbits an' a berry patch." "You are nuts." "We are too. You ast George." "You are nuts." Crooks was scornful. "I seen hunderds of men come by on the road an' on the ranches, w T ith their bindles on their back an' that same damn thing in their heads. Hunderds of them. They come, an' they quit an' go on; an' every damn one of them's got a little piece of land in his head. An' never a God damn one of them ever gets it. Just like heaven. Ever'body wants a little piece of Ian*. I read plenty of books out here. Nobody never gets to heaven, OF MICE AND MEN and nobody gets no land. It is just in their head. They are all the time talkin' about it, but it is jus' in their head. He paused and looked toward the open door, for the horses were moving restlessly and the halter chains clinked. A horse whinnied. "I guess somebody is out there," Crooks said. "Maybe Slim. Slim comes in sometimes two, three times a night. Slim's a real skinner. He looks out for his team." He pulled himself painfully upright and moved toward the door. "That you. Slim?" he called. Candy's voice answered. "Slim went in town. Say, you seen Lennie?" "Ya mean the big guy?" "Yeah. Seen him around any place?" "He is in here," Crooks said shortly. He went back to his bunk and lay down. Candy stood in the doorway scratching his bald wrist and looking blindly into the lighted room. He made no attempt to enter. "Tell ya what, Lennie. I been figuring out About them rabbits." OF MICE AND MEN Crooks said irritably, "You can come in if you want." Candy seemed embarrassed. "I do' know. 'Course, if ya want me to." "Come on in. If ever'body's cornin' in, you might just as well." It was difficult for Crooks to conceal his pleasure with anger. Candy came in, but he was still embarrassed. "You got a nice cozy little place in here," he said to Crooks. "Must be nice to have a room all to yourself this way." "Sure," said Crooks. "And a manure pile under the window. Sure, it is swell." Lennie broke in, "You said about them rabbits." Candy leaned against the wall beside the broken collar while he scratched the wrist stump. "I been here a long time," he said. "An* Crooks been here a long time. This is the first time I ever been in his room." Crooks said darkly, "Guys do not come into a colored man's room very much. Nobody been here but Slim. Slim an' the boss." OF MICE AND MEN Candy quickly changed the subject. "Slim's as good a skinner as I ever seen." Lennic leaned toward the old swamper. "About them rabbits," he insisted. Candy smiled. "I got it figured out. We can make some money on them rabbits if we go about it right." "But I get to tend them," Lennie broke in. "George says I get to tend them. He promised." Crooks interrupted brutally. "You guys is just kiddin' yourself. You will talk about it a hell of a lot, but you will not get no land. You will be a swamper here till they take you out in a box. Hell, I seen too many guys. Lennie here'll quit an' be on the road in two, three weeks. Seems like ever' guy got land in his head." Candy rubbed his cheek angrily. "You God damn right we are going to do it. George says we are. We got the money right now." "Yeah?" said Crooks. "An' where is George now? In town in a whore house. That is where your money's going. Jesus, I seen it happen too IJ2 OF MICE AND MEN many times. I seen too many guys with land in their head. They never get none under their hand." Candy cried, "Sure they all want it. Everybody wants a little bit of land, not much. Jus' som'thin' that was his. Som'thin' he could live on and there could not nobody throw him off of it. 1 never had none. I planted crops for damn near ever'body in this state, but they was not my crops, and when I harvested them, it was not none of my harvest. But we going to do it now, and do not you make no mistake about that. George are not got the money in town. That money's in the bank. Me an' Lennie an' George. We going to have a room to ourself. We are going to have a dog an' rabbits an' chickens. We are going to have green corn an' maybe a cow or a goat." He stopped, overwhelmed with his picture. Crooks asked, "You say you got the money?" "Damn right. We got most of it. Just a little bit more to get. Have it all in one month. George got the land all picked out, too." OF MICE AND MEN Crooks reached around and explored his spine with his hand. "I never seen a guy really do it," he said. "I seen guys nearly crazy with loneliness for land, but ever' time a whore house or a blackjack game took what it takes." He hesitated. " .... If you .... guys would want a hand to work for nothing— just his keep, why I would come an' lend a hand. I are not so crippled I cannot work like a son-of-a-bitch if I want to." "Any you boys seen Curley?" They swung their heads toward the door. Looking in was Curley's wife. Her face was heavily made up. Her lips were slightly parted. She breathed strongly, as though she had been running. "Curley are not been here," Candy said sourly. She stood still in the doorway, smiling a little at them, rubbing the nails of one hand with the thumb and forefinger of the other. And her eyes traveled from one face to another. "They left all the weak ones here," she said finally. "Think OF MICE AND MEN I do not know where they all went? Even Curley. I know where they all went." Lennie watched her, fascinated; but Candy and Crooks were scowling down away from her eyes. Candy said, "Then if you know, why you want to ast us where Curley is at?" She regarded them amusedly. "Funny thing," she said. "If I catch any one man, and he is alone, I get along line with him. But just let two of the guys get together an' you will not talk. Jus' nothing but mad." She dropped her fingers and put her hands on her hips. "You are all scared of each other, that is what. Ever' one of you's scared the rest is going to get something on you." After a pause Crooks said, "Maybe you better go along to your own house now. We do not want no trouble." "Well, I are not giving you no trouble. Think I do not like to talk to somebody ever' once in a while? Think I like to stick in that house alia time?" OF MICE AND MEN Candy laid the stump of his wrist on his knee and rubbed it gently with his hand. He said accusingly, "You got to husban'. You got no call foolin' aroun' with other guys, causin' trouble." The girl flared up. "Sure I got to husban'. You all seen him. Swell guy, are not he? Spends all his time sayin' what he is going to do to guys he do not like, and he do not like nobody. Think I am going to stay in that two-by-four house and listen how Curley's going to lead with his left twict, and then bring in the old right cross? 'One-two' he says. 'Jus the old one-two an' he will go down.' " She paused and her face lost its sullenncss and grew interested. "Say— what happened to Curley's han'?" There was an embarrassed silence. Candy stole a look at Lcnnie. Then he coughed. "Why .... Curley .... he got his han' caught in a machine, madam. Bust his han'." She watched for a moment, and then she laughed. "Baloney! What you think you are sellin' me? Curley started som'pin' he didn' finish. i?6 OF MICE AND MEN Caught in a machine— baloney! Why, he are not give nobody the good old one-two since he got his han' bust. Who bust him?" Candy repeated sullenly, "Got it caught in a machine." "Awright," she said contemptuously. "Awright, cover 'i am up if ya wanta. Whatta l care? You bindlc bums think you are so damn good. Whatta ya think I am, a kid? I tell ya I could of went with shows. Not jus' one, neither. An' a guy toP me he could put me in pitchers. . . She was breathless with indignation. "— Sat'iday night. Ever'bodv out doing som'pin'. Ever'body! An' what am I doing? Standin' here talkin' to a bunch of bindle stiffs— a nigger an' a dum-dum and a lousy old sheep— an' likin' it because they are not nobody else." Lennie watched her, his mouth half open. Crooks had retired into the terrible protective dignity of the negro. But a change came over old Candy. He stood up suddenly and knocked his nail keg over backward. "I had enough," he H7 OF MICE AND MEN said angrily. "You are not wanted here. We told you you are not. An' I tell ya, you got floozy idears about what us guys amounts to. You are not got sense enough in that chicken head to even see that we are not stiffs. S'pose you get us canned. S'pose you do. You think we will hit the highway an' look for another lousy two-bit job like this. You do not know that we got our own ranch to go to, an' our own house. We are not got to stay here. We got to house and chickens an' fruit trees an' a place a hunderd time prettier than this. An' we got fren's, that is what we got. Maybe there was a time when we was scared of gcttin' canned, but we are not no more. We got our own lan', and it is ours, an' we c'n go to it." Curley's wife laughed at him. "Baloney," she said. "I seen too many you guys. If you had two bits in the worl', why you would be in gettin' two shots of corn with it and suckin' the bottom of the glass. I know you guys." Candy's face had grown redder and redder, but before she was done speaking, he had conOF MICE AND MEN trol of himself. He was the master of the situation. "I might of knew," he said gently. "Maybe you just better go along an' roll your hoop. We are not got nothing to say to you at all. We know what we got, and we do not care whether you know it or not. So maybe you better jus' scatter along now, because Curley maybe are not going to like his wife out in the bam with us 'bindle stiffs.' " She looked from one face to another, and they were all closed against her. And she looked longest at Lennie, until he dropped his eyes in embarrassment. Suddenly she said, "Where did you get them bruises on your face?" Lennie looked up guiltily. "Who— me?" "Yeah, you." Lennie looked to Candy for help, and then he looked at his lap again. "He got his han' caught in a machine," he said. Curley's wife laughed. "O.K., Machine. I will talk to you later. I like machines." Candy broke in. "You let this guy alone. OF MICE AND MEN Do not you do no messing aroun' with him. I am going to tell George what you says. George will not have you messin' with Lennie." "Who is George?" she asked. "The little guy you come with?" Lennie smiled happily. "That is him," he said. "That is the guy, an' he is going to let me tend the rabbits." "Well, if that is all you want, I might get a couple rabbits myself." Crooks stood up from his bunk and faced her. "I had enough," he said coldly. "You got no rights cornin' in a colored man's room. You got no rights messing around in here at all. Now you jus' get out, an' get out quick. If you do not, I am going to ast the boss not to ever let you come in the bam no more." She turned on him in scorn. "Listen, Nigger," she said. "You know what I can do to you if you open your trap?" Crooks stared hopelessly at her, and then he sat down on his bunk and drew into himself. OF MICE AND MEN She closed on him. "You know what I could do?" Crooks seemed to grow smaller, and he pressed himself against the wall. "Yes, madam." "Well, you keep your place then, Nigger. I could get you strung up on a tree so easy it are not even funny." Crooks had reduced himself to nothing. There was no personality, no ego— nothing to arouse either like or dislike. He said, "Yes, madam," and his voice was toneless. For a moment she stood over him as though waiting for him to move so that she could whip at him again; but Crooks sat perfectly still, his eyes averted, everything that might be hurt drawn in. She turned at last to the other two. Old Candy was watching her, fascinated. "If you was to do that, we would tell," he said quietly. "We would tell about you framin' Crooks." "Tell an' be damned," she cried. "Nobody'd listen to you, an' you know it. Nobody'd listen to you." OF MICE AND MEN Candy subsided. "No . . . he agreed. "Nobody would listen to us." Lennie whined, "I wisht George was here. I wisht George was here." Candy stepped over to him. "Do not you worry none," he said. "I jus' heard the guys cornin' in. George'll be in the bunk house right now, I bet." He turned to Curley's wife. "You better go home now," he said quietly. "If you go right now, we will not tell Curley you was here." She appraised him coolly. "I are not sure you heard nothing." "Better not take no chances," he said. "If you are not sure, you better take the safe way." She turned to Lennie. "I am glad you bust up Curley a little bit. He got it cornin' to him. Sometimes I would like to bust him myself." She slipped out the door and disappeared into the dark bam. And while she went through the bam, the halter chains rattled, and some horses snorted and some stamped their feet. Crooks seemed to come slowly out of the layOF MICE AND MEN ers of protection he had put on. "Was that the truth what you said about the guys come back?" he asked. "Sure. I heard them." "Well, I did not hear nothing." "The gate banged," Candy said, and he went on, "Jesus Christ, Curley's wife can move quiet. I guess she had a lot of practice, though." Crooks avoided the whole subject now. "Maybe you guys better go," he said. "I are not sure I want you in here no more. A colored man got to have some rights even if he do not like them." Candy said, "That bitch did not ought to of said that to you." "It was not nothing," Crooks said dully. "You guys cornin' in an' settin' made me forget. What she says is true." The horses snorted out in the bam and the chains rang and a voice called, "Lennie. Oh, Lennie. You in the barn?" "It is George," Lennie cried. And he answered, "Here, George. I am right in here." H3 OF MICE AND MEN In a second George stood framed in the door, and he looked disapprovingly about. "What you doing in Crooks' room. You had not ought to be here." Crooks nodded. "I toF them, but they come in anyways." "Well, why 'n't you kick them out?" "I di'n't care much," said Crooks. "Lennie's a nice fella." Now Candy aroused himself. "Oh, George! I been figurin' and figurin'. I got it doped out how we can even make some money on them rabbits." George scowled. "I thought I tol' you not to tell nobody about that." Candy was crestfallen. "Did not tell nobody but Crooks." George said, "Well you guys get outta here. Jesus, seems like I cannot go away for a minute." Candy and Lennie stood up and went toward the door. Crooks called, "Candy!" "Huh?" OF MICE AND MEN " 'Member what I said about hoein' and doing odd jobs?" "Yeah," said Candy. "I remember." "Well, jus' forget it," said Crooks. "I didn' mean it. Jus' foolin'. 1 wouldn' want to go no place like that." "Well, O.K., if you feel like that. Goodnight." The three men went out of the door. As they went through the barn the horses snorted and the halter chains rattled. Crooks sat on his bunk and looked at the door for a moment, and then he reached for the liniment bottle. He pulled out his shirt in back, poured a little liniment in his pink palm and, reaching around, he fell slowly to rubbing his back. ONE end of the great bam was piled high with new hay and over the pile hung the four-taloned jackson fork suspended from its pulley. The hay came down like a mountain slope to the other end of the bam, and there was a level place as yet unfilled with the new crop. At the sides the feeding racks were visible, and between the slats the heads of horses could be seen. It was Sunday afternoon. The resting horses nibbled the remaining wisps of hay, and they stamped their feet and they bit the wood of the mangers and rattled the halter chains. The afternoon sun sliced in through the cracks of the bam walls and lay in bright lines on the hay. There was the buzz of flies in the air, the lazy afternoon humming. OF MICE AND MEN From outside came the clang of horseshoes on the playing peg and the shouts of men, playing, encouraging, jeering. But in the bam it was quiet and humming and lazy and warm. Only Lennie was in the barn, and Lennic sat in the hay beside a packing case under a manger in the end of the barn that had not been filled with hay. Lennie sat in the hay and looked at a little dead puppy that lay in front of him. Lennie looked at it for a long time, and then he put out his huge hand and stroked it, stroked it clear from one end to the other. And Lennie said softly to the puppy, "Why do you got to get killed? You are not so little as mice. I did not bounce you hard." He bent the pup's head up and looked in its face, and he said to it, "Now maybe George are not going to let me tend no rabbits, if he fin's out you got killed." He scooped a little hollow and laid the puppy in it and covered it over with hay, out of sight; but he continued to stare at the mound he had made. He said, "This are not no bad thing like OF MICE AND MEN I got to go hide in the brush. Oh! no. This are not. I will tell George I foun' it dead." He unburied the puppy and inspected it, and he stroked it from ears to tail. He went on sorrowfully, "But he will know. George always knows. He will say, 'You done it. Do not try to put nothing over on me.' An' he will say, 'Now jus' for that you do not get to tend no rabbits!' " Suddenly his anger arose. "God damn you," he cried. "Why do you got to get killed? You are not so little as mice." He picked up the pup and hurled it from him. He turned his back on it. He sat bent over his knees and he whispered, "Now I will not get to tend the rabbits. Now he will not let me." He rocked himself back and forth in his sorrow. From outside came the clang of horseshoes on the iron stake, and then a little chorus of cries. Lennie got up and brought the puppy back and laid it on the hay and sat down. He stroked the pup again. "You was not big enough," he said. "They tol' me and toP me you was not. I di'n't OF MICE AND MEN know you would get killed so easy." He worked his fingers on the pup's limp car. "Maybe George will not care," he said. " This here God damn little son-of-a-bitch was not nothing to George." Ciurley's wife came around the end of the last stall. She came very quietly, so that Lennie did not see her. She wore her bright cotton dress and the mules with the red ostrich feathers. Her face was made up and the little sausage curls were all in place. She was quite near to him before Lennie looked up and saw her. In a panic he shoveled hay over the puppy with his fingers. He looked sullenly up at her. She said, "What you got there, sonny boy?" Lennie glared at her. "George says I are not to have nothing to do with you— talk to you or nothing." She laughed. "George giving you orders about everything?" Lennie looked down at the hay. "Says I cannot tend no rabbits if I talk to you or anything." She said quietly, "He is scared Curley will get OF MICE AND MEN mad. Well, Curley got his arm in a sling— an' if Curley gets tough, you can break his other han\ You did not put nothing over on me about gettin' it caught in no machine." But Lennie was not to be drawn. "No, sir. I are not going to talk to you or nothing." She knelt in the hay beside him. "Listen," she said. "All the guys got a horseshoe tenement going on. It is on'y about four of the clock. None of them guys is going to leave that tenement. Why cannot I talk to you? I never get to talk to nobody. I get awful lonely." Lennie said, "Well, I are not supposed to talk to you or nothing." "I get lonely," she said. "You can talk to people, but I cannot talk to nobody but Curley. Else he gets mad. How did you like not to talk to anybody?" Lennie said, "Well, I are not supposed to. George's scared I will get in trouble." She changed the subject. "What you got covered up there?" OF MICE AND MEN Then all of Lennie's woe came back on him. "Jus' my pup," he said sadly. "Jus' my little pup." And he swept the hay from on top of it. "Why, he is dead," she cried. "He was so little," said Lennie. "I was jus' playin' with him .... an' he made like he is going to bite me .... an' I made like I was going to smack him .... an' .... an' I done it. An' then he was dead." She consoled him. "Do not you worry none. He was jus' a mutt. You can get another one easy. The whole country is fulla mutts." "It are not that so much," Lennie explained miserably. "George are not going to let me tend no rabbits now." "Why do not he?" "Well, he said if I done any more bad things he are not going to let me tend the rabbits." She moved closer to him and she spoke soothingly. "Do not you worry about talkin' to me. Listen to the guys yell out there. They got four OF MICE AND MEN dollars bet in that tenement. None of them are not going to leave till it is over." "If George sees me talkin' to you he will give me hell," Lennie said cautiously. "He tol' me so." Her face grew angry. "Wha's the matter with me?" she cried. "Are not I got a right to talk :o nobody? Whatta they think I am, anyways? You are a nice guy. I do not know why I cannot talk to you. I are not doing no harm to you." "Well, George says you will get us in a mess." "Aw, nuts!" she said. "What kind of harm am I doing to you? Seems like they are not none of them cares how I got to live. I tell you I are not used to livin' like this. I coulda made something of myself." She said darkly, "Maybe I will - - you And then her words tumbled out in a passic^' communication, as though she hurried before t0 listener could be taken away. "I lived righ, Salinas," she said. "Come there when I wa?* kid. Well, a show come through, an' I met one of the actors. He says I could go with that show. OF MICE AND MEN But my oP lady wouldn' let me. She says bebecause I was on'y fifteen. But the guy says I coulda. If I would went, I would not be livin' like this, you bet." Lennie stroked the pup back and forth. "We goi.na have a little place— an' rabbits," he explained. She went on with her story quickly, before she should be interrupted. " 'Nother time I met a guy, an' he was in pitchers. Went out to the Riverside Dance Palace with him. He says he was going to put me in the movies. Says I was a natural. Soon's he got back to Hollywood he was going to write to me about it." She looked rabL-ly at Lennie to sec whether she was i am- "Wig him. "I never got that letter," she said. "Ways thought my oP lady stole it. Well, I he a.'t going to stay no place where I could not get Shere or make something of myself, an' Jtnere they stole your letters. I ast her if she stole it, too, an' she says no. So I married Curley. Met him out to the Riverside Dance Palace OF MICE AND MEN that same night." She demanded, "You listenin'?" "Me? Sure." "Well, I are not told this to nobody before. Maybe I ought'n to. I don' like Curley. He are not a nice fella." And because she had confided in him, she moved closer to Lennie and sat beside him. "Coulda been in the movies, an' had nice clothes— all them nice clothes like they wear. An' I coulda sat in them big hotels, an' had pitchers took of me. When they had them previews I coulda went to them, an' spoke in the radio, an' it wouldn'ta cost me a cent because I was in the pitcher. An' all them nice clothes like they wear. Because this guy says I was a natural." She looked up at Lennie, and she made a small grand gesture with her arm and hand to show that she could act. The fingers trailed after her leading wrist, and her little finger stuck out grandly from the rest. Lennie sighed deeply. From outside came the clang of a horseshoe on metal, and then a chorus OF MICE AND MEN of cheers. "Somebody made a ringer," said Curley's wife. Now the light was lifting as the sun went down, and the sun streaks climbed up the wall and fell over the feeding racks and over the heads of the horses. Lennie said, "Maybe if I took this pup out and throwed him away George would not never know. An' then I could tend the rabbits without no trouble." Curley's wife said angrily, "Do not you think of nothing but rabbits?" "We going to have a little place," Lennie explained patiently. "We going to have a house an' a garden and a place for alfalfa, an' that alfalfa is for the rabbits, an' I take a sack and get it all fulla alfalfa and then 1 take it to the rabbits." She asked, "What makes you so nuts about rabbits?" Lennie had to think carefully before he could come to a conclusion. He moved cautiously close to her, until he was right against her. "I OF MICE AND MEN like to pet nice things. Once at a fair I seen some of them long-hair rabbits. An' they was nice, you bet. Sometimes I have even pet mice, but not when I could get nothing better." Curley's wife moved away from him a little. "I think you are nuts," she said. "No I are not," Lennie explained earnestly. "George says I are not. I like to pet nice things with my fingers, sof' things." She was a little bit reassured. "Well, who do not?" she said. "Evcr'body likes that. I like to feel silk an' velvet. Do you like to feel velvet?" Lennie chuckled with pleasure. "You bet, by God," he cried happily. "An' I had some, too. A lady give me some, an' that lady was— my own Aunt Clara. She give it right to me— 'bout this big a piece. I wisht I had that velvet right now." A frown came over his face. "I lost it," he said. "I are not seen it for a long time." Curley's wife laughed at him. "You are nuts," she said. "But you are a kind of nice fella. Jus' like a big baby. But a person can see kind of what you OF MICE AND MEN mean. When I am doing my hair sometimes I jus' set an' stroke it because it is so soft." To show how she did it, she ran her fingers over the top of her head. "Some people got kind of coarse hair," she said complacently. "Take Curley. His hair is jus' like wire. But mine is soft and fine. 'Course I brush it a lot. That makes it fine. Here— feel right here." She took Lennie's hand and put it on her head. "Feel right aroun' there an' see how soft it is." Lennie's big fingers fell to stroking her hair. "Do not you muss it up," she said. Lennie said, "Oh! That is nice," and he stroked harder. "Oh, that is nice." "Look out, now, you will muss it." And then she cried angrily, "You stop it now, you will mess it all up." She jerked her head sideways, and Lennie's fingers closed on her hair and hung on. "Let go," she cried. "You let go!" Lennie was in a panic. His face was contorted. She screamed then, and Lennie's other hand closed over her mouth and nose. "Please do not," OF MICE AND MEN he begged. "Oh! Please do not do that. George'll be mad." She struggled violently under his hands. Her feet battered on the hay and she writhed to be free; and from under Lennie's hand came a muffled screaming. Lennie began to cry with fright. "Oh! Please do not do none of that," he begged. "George going to say I done a bad thing. He are not going to let me tend no rabbits." He moved his hand a little and her hoarse cry came out. Then Lennie grew angry. "Now do not," he said. "I do not want you to yell. You going to get me in trouble jus' like George says you will. Now do not you do that." And she continued to struggle, and her eyes were wild with terror. He shook her then, and he was angry with her. "Do not you go yellin'," he said, and he shook her; and her body flopped like a fish. And then she was still, for Lennie had broken her neck. He looked down at her, and carefully he removed his hand from over her mouth, and she lay still. "I do not want ta hurt you," he said, "but OF MICE AND MEN George'll be mad if you yell." When she did not answer nor move he bent closely over her. He lifted her arm and let it drop. For a moment he seemed bewildered. And then he whispered in fright, "I done a bad thing. I done another bad thing." He pawed up the hay until it partly covered her. From outside the barn came a cry of men and the double clang of shoes on metal. For the first time Lennie became conscious of the outside. He crouched down in the hay and listened. "I done a real bad thing," he said. "I should not of did that. George'll be mad. An' .... he said . . . . an' hide in the brush till he come. He is going to be mad. In the brush till he come. Tha's what he said." Lennie went back and looked at the dead girl. The puppy lay close to her. Lennie picked it up. "I will throw him away," lie said. "It is bad enough like it is." He put the pup under his coat, and he crept to the bam wall and peered out between the cracks, toward the horseshoe OF MICE AND MEN game. And then he crept around the end of the last manger and disappeared. The sun streaks were high on the wall by now, and the light was growing soft in the barn. Curley's wife lay on her back, and she was half covered with hay. It was very quiet in the bam, and the quiet of the afternoon was on the ranch. Even the clang of the pitched shoes, even the voices of the men in the game seemed to grow more quiet. The air in the bam was dusky in advance of the outside day. A pigeon flew in through the open hay door and circled and flew out again. Around the last stall came a shepherd bitch, lean and long, with heavy, hanging dugs. Halfway to the packing box where the puppies were she caught the dead scent of Curley's wife, and the hair arose along her spine. She whimpered and cringed to the packing box, and jumped in among the puppies. Curley's wife lay with a half-covering of yellow hay. And the meanness and the plannings OF MICE AND MEN and the discontent and the ache for attention were all gone from her face. She was very pretty and simple, and her face was sweet and young. Now her rouged checks and her reddened lips made her seem alive and sleeping very lightly. The curls, tiny little sausages, were spread on the hay behind her head, and her lips were parted. As happens sometimes, a moment settled and hovered and remained for much more than a moment. And sound stopped and movement 6topped for much, much more than a moment. Then gradually time awakened again and moved sluggishly on. The horses stamped on the other side of the feeding racks and the halter chains clinked. Outside, the mens' voices became louder and clearer. From around the end of the last stall old Candy's voice came. "Lennie," he called. "Oh, Lemuel You in here? I been figuring some more. Tell you what we can do, Lennie." Old Candy appeared around the end of the last stall. "Oh, OF MICE AND MEN Lennie!" he called again; and then he stopped, and his body stiffened. He rubbed his smooth wrist on his white stubble whiskers. "I di'n't know you was here," he said to Curley's wife. When she did not answer, he stepped nearer. "You oughten to sleep out here," he said disapprovingly; and then he was beside her and— "Oh, Jesus Christ!" He looked about helplessly, and he rubbed his beard. And then he jumped up and went quickly out of the bam. But the barn was alive now. Hie horses stamped and snorted, and they chewed the straw of their bedding and they clashed the chains of their halters. In a moment Candy came back, and George was with him. George said, "What was it you wanted to see me about?" Candy pointed at Curley's wife. George stared. "What is the matter with her?" he asked. He stepped closer, and then he echoed Candy's words. "Oh, Jesus Christ!" He was down on his knees beside her. He put his hand OF MICE AND MEN over her heart. And finally, when he stood up, slowly and stiffly, his face was as hard and tight as wood, and his eyes were hard. Candy said, "What done it?" George looked coldly at him. "Are not you got any idcar?" he asked. And Candy was silent. "1 should of knew," George said hopelessly. "I guess maybe way back in my head I did." Candy asked, "What we going to do now', George. What we going to do now?" George was a long time in answering. "Guess . . . . we got to tell the .... guys. I guess we got to get 'i am an' lock 'i am up. We cannot let 'i am get away. Why, the poor bastard'd starve." And he tried to reassure himself. "Maybe they will lock 'i am up an' be nice to 'i am." But Candy said excitedly, "We oughtta let 'i am get away. You do not know that Curley. Curley gon'ta wanta get 'i am lynched. Curley'll get 'i am killed." George watched Candy's lips. "Yeah," he said at last, "that is right, Curley will. An' the other OF MICE AND MEN guys will." And he looked back at Curley's wife. Now Candy spoke his greatest fear. "You an' me can get that little place, cannot we, George? You an' me can go there an' live nice, cannot we, George? Cannot we?" Before George answered, Candy dropped his head and looked down at the hay. He knew. George said softly, "—I think I knowed from the very first. I think I knowed we would never do her. He usta like to hear about it so much I got to thinking maybe we would." "Then— it is all off?" Candy asked sulkily. George did not answer his question. George said, "I will work my month an' I will take my fifty bucks an' I will stay all night in some lousy cat house. Or I will set in some poolroom till ever'- body goes home. An' then I will come back an' work another month an' I will have fifty bucks more." Candy said, "He is such a nice fella. I didn' think he would do nothing like this." OF MICE AND MEN George still stared at Curley's wife. "Lennie never done it in meanness," he said. "All the time he done bad things, but he never done one of them mean." He straightened up and looked back at Candy. "Now listen. We got to tell the guys. They got to bring him in, I guess. They are not no way out. Maybe they will not hurt 'i am." He said sharply, "I are not going to let them hurt Lennie. Now you listen. The guys might think I was in on it. I am going to go in the bunk house. Then in a minute you come out and tell the guys about her, and I will come along and make like I never seen her. Will you do that? So the guys will not think 1 was in on it?" Candy said, "Sure, George. Sure I will do that." "O.K. Give me a couple minutes then, and you come runnin' out an' tell like you jus' found her. I am going now." George turned and went quickly out of the barn. Old Candy watched him go. He looked helplessly back at Curley's wife, and gradually his sorrow and his anger grew into words. "You OF MICE AND MEN God damn tramp," he said viciously. "You done it, di'n't you? I s'pose you are glad. Ever'body knowed you would mess things up. You was not no good. You are not no good now, you lousy tart." He sniveled, and his voice shook. "1 could of hoed in the garden and washed dishes for them guys." lie paused, and then went on in a singsong. And he repeated the old words: "If they was a circus or a baseball game .... wc would of went to her .... jus' said 'ta hell with work,' an' went to her. Never ast nobody's say so. An' they would of been a pig and chickens .... an' in the winter .... the little fat stove .... an' the rain cornin' .... an' us jus' settin' there." His eyes blinded with tears and he turned and went weakly out of the barn, and he rubbed his bristly whiskers with his wrist stump. Outside the noise of the game stopped. There was a rise of voices in question, a drum of running feet and the men burst into the bam. Slim and Carlson and young Whit and Curley, and Crooks keeping back out of attention range. OF MICE AND MEN Candy came after them, and last of all came George. George had put on his blue denim coat and buttoned it, and his black hat was pulled down low over his eyes. The men raced around the last stall. Their eyes found Curley's wife in the gloom, they stopped and stood still and looked. Then Slim went quietly over to her, and he felt her wrist. One lean finger touched her cheek, and then his hand went under her slightly twisted neck and his fingers explored her neck. When he stood up the men crowded near and the spell was broken. Curley came suddenly to life. "I know who done it," he cried. "That big son-of-a-bitch done it. I know he done it. Why— ever'body else was out there playin' horseshoes." He worked himself into a fury. "I am going to get him. I am going for my shot gun. I will kill the big son-of-a- bitch myself. I will shoot 'i am in the guts. Come on, you guys." He ran furiously out of the bam. Carlson said, "I will get my Luger," and he ran OF MICE AND MEN Slim turned quietly to George. "I guess Lennie done it, all right," he said. "Her neck's bust. Lennie coulda did that." George did not answer, but he nodded slowly. His hat was so far down on his forehead that his eyes were covered. Slim went on, "Maybe like that time in Weed you was tellin' about." Again George nodded. Slim sighed. "Well, I guess we got to get him. Where you think he might of went?" It semed to take George some time to free his words. "He— would of went south," he said. "We come from north so he would of went south." "I guess we got to get 'i am," Slim repeated. George stepped close. "Couldn' we maybe bring him in an' they will lock him up? He is nuts, Slim. He never done this to be mean." Slim nodded. "We might," he said. "If we could keep Curley in, we might. But Curley's going to want to shoot 'i am. Curley's still mad OF MICE AND MEN about his hand. An' s'pose they lock him up an* strap him down and put him in a cage. That are not no good, George." "I know," said George, "I know." Carlson came running in. "The bastard's stole my Luger," he shouted. "It are not in my bag." Curley followed him, and Curley carried a shotgun in his good hand. Curley was cold now. "All right, you guys," he said. "The nigger's got a shotgun. You take it, Carlson. When you see 'um, do not give 'i am no chance. Shoot for his guts. That will double 'i am over." Whit said excitedly, "I are not got a gun." Curley said, "You go in Soledad an' get a cop. Get A1 Wilts, he is deputy sheriff. Le's go now." He turned suspiciously on George. "You are cornin' with us, fella." "Yeah," said George. "I will come. But listen, Curley. The poor bastard's nuts. Do not shoot 'i am. He di'n't know what he was doing." "Do not shoot 'i am?" Curley cried. "He got Carlson's Luger. 'Course we will shoot 'i am." OF MICE AND MEN George said weakly, "Maybe Carlson lost his gun." "I seen it this morning," said Carlson. "No, it is been took." Slim stood looking down at Curley's wife. He said, "Curley— maybe you better stay here with your wife." Curley's face reddened. "I am going," he said. "I am going to shoot the guts outa that big bastard myself, even if I only got one hand. I am going to get 'i am." Slim turned to Candy. "You stay here with her then. Candy. The rest of us better get going." They moved away. George stopped a moment beside Candy and they both looked down at the dead girl until Curley called, "You George! You stick with us so we do not think you had nothing to do with this." George moved slowly after them, and his feet dragged heavily. And when they were gone, Candy squatted OF MICE AND MEN down in the hay and watched the face of Curley's wife. "Poor bastard," he said softly. The sound of the men grew 7 fainter. The barn w 7 as darkening gradually and, in their stalls, the horses shifted their feet and rattled the halter chains. Old Candy lay down in the hay and covered his eyes with his arm. THE deep green pool of the Salinas River was still in the late afternoon. Already the sun had left the valley to go climbing up the slopes of the Gabilan mountains, and the hilltops were rosy in the sun. But by the pool among the mottled sycamores, a pleasant shade had fallen. A water snake glided smoothly up the pool, twisting its periscope head from side to side; and it swam the length of the pool and came to the legs of a motionless heron that stood in the shallows. A silent head and beak lanced down and plucked it out by the head, and the beak swallowed the little snake while its tail waved frantically. A far rush of wind sounded and a gust drove through the tops of the trees like a wave. The OF MICE AND MEN sycamore leaves turned up their silver sides, the brown, dry leaves on the ground scudded a few feet. And row on row of tiny wind waves flowed up the pool's green surface. As quickly as it had come, the wind died, and the clearing was quiet again. The heron stood in the shallows, motionless and waiting. Another little water snake swam up the pool, turning its periscope head from side to side. Suddenly Lcnnic appeared out of the brush, and he came as silently as a creeping bear moves. The heron pounded the air with its wings, jacked itself clear of the water and flew off down river. The little snake slid in among the reeds at the pool's side. Lennie came quietly to the pool's edge. He knelt down and drank, barely touching his lips to the water. When a little bird skittered over the dry leaves behind him, his head jerked up and he strained toward the sound with eyes and ears until he saw the bird, and then he dropped his head and drank again. OF MICE AND MEN When he was finished, he sat down on the bank, with his side to the pool, so that he could watch the trail's entrance. He embraced his knees and laid his chin down on his knees. The light climbed on out of the valley, and as it went, the tops of the mountains seemed to blaze with increasing brightness. Lennie said softly, "1 di'n'r forget, you bet, God damn. Hide in the brush an' wait for George." He pulled his hat down low over his eyes. "George going to give me hell," he said. "George going to wish he was alone an' not have me botherin' him." He turned his head and looked at the bright mountain tops. "I can go right ofF there an' find a cave," he said. And he continued sadly, "—an' never have no ketchup— but I will not care. If George do not want me ... . I will go away. I will go away." And then from out of Lennie's head there came a little fat old woman. She wore thick bull's-eye glasses and she wore a huge gingham apron with pockets, and she was starched and OF MICE AND MEN clean. She stood in front of Lennie and put her hands on her hips, and she frowned disapprovingly at him. And when she spoke, it was in Lennie's voice. "I tol' you an' tol' you," she said. "I toF you, 'Min' George because he is such a nice fella an' good to you.' But you do not never take no care. You do bad things." And Lennie answered her, "I tried. Aunt Clara, madam. I tried and tried. 1 couldn' help it." ''You never give a thought to George," she went on in Lennie's voice. "He been doing nice things for you alia time. When he got a piece a pie you always got half or more'n half. An' if they was any ketchup, why he would give it all to you." "I know," said Lennie miserably. "I tried, Aunt Clara, madam. I tried and tried." She interrupted him. "All the time he coulda had such a good time if it was not for you. He would have took his pay an' raised hell in a whore OF MICE AND MEN house, and he coulda set in a pool room an* played snooker. But he got to take care of you." Lennie moaned with grief. "I know, Aunt Clara, madam. I will go right off in the hills an' I will fin' a cave an' I will live there so I will not be no more trouble to George." "You jus' say that," she said sharply. "You are always sayin' that, an' you know sonofabitching well you are not never going to do it. You will jus' stick around an' stew the b'Jcsus outa George all the time." Lennie said, "I might jus' as well go away. George are not going to let me tend no rabbits now." Aunt Clara was gone, and from out of Lennie's head there came a gigantic rabbit. It sat on its haunches in front of him, and it waggled its ears and crinkled its nose at him. And it spoke in Lennie's voice too. "Tend rabbits," it said scornfully. "You crazy bastard. You are not fit to lick the boots of no rabbit. You would forget them and let them go hungry. That is what you would do. An' then what would George think?" OF MICE AND MEN "I would not forget," Lennie said loudly. "The hell you wouldn'," said the rabbit. "You are not worth a greased jack -pin to ram you into hell. Christ knows George done ever'thing he could to jack you outa the sewer, but it do not do no good. If you think George going to let you tend rabbits, you are even crazier'n usual. He are not. He is going to beat hell outa you with a stick, that is what he is going to do." Now Lennie retorted belligerently, "He are not neither. George will not do nothing like that. I have knew George since— I forget when— and he are not never raised his han' to me with a stick. He is nice to me. He are not going to be mean." "Well, he is sick of you," said the rabbit. "He is going to beat hell outa you an' then go away an' leave you." "He will not," Lennie cried frantically. "He will not do nothing like that. I know George. Me an' him travels together." But the rabbit repeated softly over and over, "He going to leave you, ya crazy bastard. He OF MICE AND MEN going to leave ya all alone. He going to leave ya, crazy bastard." Lennie put his hands over his ears. "He are not, I tell ya he are not." And he cried, "Oh! George —George— George! " George came quietly out of the brush and the rabbit scuttled back into Lennie's brain. George said quietly, "What the hell you yellin' about?" Lennie got up on his knees. "You are not going to leave me, are ya, George? 1 know you are not." George came stiffly near and sat down beside him. "No." "I knowed it," Lennie cried. "You are not that kind." George was silent. Lennie said, "George." "Yeah?" "1 done another bad thing." "It do not make no difference," George said, and he fell silent again. Only the topmost ridges were in the sun now. OF MICE AND MEN The shadow in the valley was blue and soft. From the distance came the sound of men shouting to one another. George turned his head and listened to the shouts. Lennie said, "George." "Yeah?" "Are not you going to give me hell?" "Give ya hell?" "Sure, like you always done before. Like, 'If I di'n't have you I would take my fifty bucks ' " "Jesus Christ, Lennie! You cannot remember nothing that happens, but you remember ever' word 1 say." "Well, are not you going to say it?" George shook himself. He said woodenly, "If I was alone I could live so easy." His voice was monotonous, had no emphasis. "I could get a job an' not have no mess." He stopped. "Go on," said Lennie. "An' when the enda the month come " "An' when the end of the month come I could take my fifty bucks an' go to a ... . cat house . . . He stopped again. OF MICE AND MEN Lennie looked eagerly at him. "Go on, George. Are not you going to give me no more hell?" "No," said George. "Well, I can go away," said Lennie. "I will go right off in the hills an' find a cave if you don' want me." George shook himself again. "No," he said. "I want you to stay with me here." Lennie said craftily— "Tell me like you done before." "Tell you what?" " 'Bout the other guys an' about us. George said, "Guys like us got no fambly. They make a little stake an' then they blow it in. They are not got nobody in the worl' that gives a hoot in hell about them — " " But not us," Lennie cried happily. "Tell about us now." George was quiet for a moment. "But not us," he said. "Because — " OF MICE AND MEN "Because I got you an' — " "An' I got you. We got each other, that is what, that gives a hoot in hell about us," Lennie cried in triumph. The little evening breeze blew over the clearing and the leaves rustled and the wind waves flowed up the green pool. And the shouts of men sounded again, this time much closer than before. George took off his hat. He said shakily, "Take off your hat, Lennie. The air feels fine." Lennie removed his hat dutifully and laid it on the ground in front of him. The shadow in the valley was bluer, and the evening came fast. On the wind the sound of crashing in the brush came to them. Lennie said, "Tell how it is going to be." George had been listening to the distant sounds. For a moment he was business-like. "Look acrost the river, Lennie, an' I will tell you so you can almost see it." Lennie turned his head and looked off across OF MICE AND MEN the pool and up the darkening slopes of the Gabilans. "We going to get a little place," George began. He reached in his side pocket and brought out Carlson's Luger; he snapped off the safety, and the hand and gun lay on the ground behind Lennie's back. He looked at the back of Lennie's head, at the place where the spine and skull were joined. A man's voice called from up the river, and another man answered. "Go on," said Lennie. George raised the gun and his hand shook, and he dropped his hand to the ground again. "Go on," said Lennie. "How is it going to be. We going to get a little place." "We will have a cow," said George. "An' we will have maybe a pig an' chickens .... an' down the flat we will have a . . . . little piece alfalfa — " "For the rabbits," Lennie shouted. "For the rabbits," George repeated. "And I get to tend the rabbits." "An' you get to tend the rabbits." OF MICE AND MEN Lennie giggled with happiness. "An' live on the fatta the lan'." "Yes." Lennie turned his head. "No, Lennie. Look down there acrost the river, like you can almost see the place." Lennie obeyed him. George looked down at the gun. There were crashing footsteps in the brush now. George turned and looked toward them. "Go on, George. When we going to do it?" "Going To do it soon." "Me an' you." "You .... an' me. Ever'body going to be nice to you. Are not going to be no more trouble. Nobody going to hurt nobody nor steal from them." Lennie said, "I thought you was mad at me, George." "No," said George. "No, Lennie. I are not mad. I never been mad, an' 1 are not now. That is a thing I want ya to know." OF MICE AND MEN The voices came close now. George raised the gun and listened to the voices. Lennie begged, "Le's do it now. Le's get that place now." "Sure, right now. I got to. We got to." And George raised the gun and steadied it, and he brought the muzzle of it close to the back of Lennie's head. The hand shook violently, but his face set and his hand steadied. He pulled the trigger. The crash of the shot rolled up the hills and rolled down again. Lennie jarred, and then settled slowly forward to the sand, and he lay without quivering. George shivered and looked at the gun, and then he threw it from him, back up on the bank, near the pile of old ashes. The brush seemed filled with cries and with the sound of running feet. Slim's voice shouted, "George. Where you at, George?" But George sat stiffly on the bank and looked at his right hand that had thrown the gun away. The group burst into the clearing, and Curley OF MICE AND MEN was ahead. He saw Lennie lying on the sand. "Got him, by God." He went over and looked down at Lennie, and then he looked back at George. "Right in the back of the head," he said softly. Slim came directly to George and sat down beside him, sat very close to him. "Never you mind," said Slim. "A guy got to sometimes." But Carlson was standing over George. "How did you do it?" he asked. "1 just done it," George said tiredly. "Did he have my gun?" "Yeah. He had your gun." "An' you got it away from him and you took it an' you killed him?" "Yeah. Tha's how." George's voice was almost a whisper. He looked steadily at his right hand that had held the gun. Slim twitched George's elbow. "Come on, George. Me an' you will go in an' get a drink." George let himself be helped to his feet. "Yeah, a drink." OF MICE AND MEN Slim said, "You hadda, George. I swear you hadda. Come on with me." He led George into the entrance of the trail and up toward the highway. Curley and Carlson looked after them. And Carlson said, "Now what the hell ya suppose is eatin' them two guys?"